Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)
Skip to main content
Search
About ESMA
Toggle submenu
Governance Structure
Toggle submenu
Board of Supervisors
Management Board
Senior Management
Joint Committee
CCP Supervisory Committee
CCP Resolution Committee
Joint Monitoring Mechanism
Standing Committees
SMSG
Board of Appeal
Ethics and Conflicts of interest
Internal Organisation
Toggle submenu
Strategy and Work Programme
Working Methods
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
International Cooperation
Legal Notice and Data Protection
Transparency and Access to Documents
Agenda
Careers
Procurement Opportunities
ESMA's Activities
Toggle submenu
Investors and Issuers
Toggle submenu
Benchmark Administrators
Credit Rating Agencies
ESG Rating Providers
External Reviewers of European Green Bonds
Fund Management
Issuer Disclosure
Investment Services and Crowdfunding
Markets and Infrastructure
Toggle submenu
Central Counterparties
Data Reporting Services Providers
Trading
Consolidated Tape Providers
Post-trading
Shortening the settlement cycle to T+1 in the EU
Market Integrity
Short Selling
Central Securities Depositories
Securitisation
Trade Repositories
Risk Analysis
Toggle submenu
Risk Monitoring
Topical Analysis
Interactive Dashboards
Sustainable Finance
Toggle submenu
Climate benchmarks and ESG disclosure
CRAs and Sustainability
Investment Services and Fund Management
Sustainability Reporting
Digital Finance and Innovation
Toggle submenu
Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)
DLT Pilot Regime
Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCA)
Supervision
Toggle submenu
Registration with ESMA
Investigations and Inspections
Sanctions and Enforcement
Supervisory Convergence
Toggle submenu
Supervisory Convergence Tools
Enforcement Convergence Initiatives
Peer Reviews
Breach of Union Law
Data
Toggle submenu
Data Reporting
Databases and Registers
Data Quality and Use
Statistical Information
European Single Access Point (ESAP)
Listing Act
Simplification and Burden Reduction
News & Publications
Toggle submenu
News
Documents
Speeches
Newsletter
Interactive Single Rulebook
Guidelines, Recommendations and Technical Standards
Risk Monitoring and Analysis
Questions and Answers
Investor Corner
Toggle submenu
Is the firm regulated?
Get ready to invest
Frauds and Scams related to ESMA Logo and ID
Publications for Investors
Product Intervention
Make a complaint
Cost of Investment Products
Interact With ESMA
Toggle submenu
Media Corner
Speaking Requests
Stakeholder Engagement
Toggle submenu
Stakeholder Relations
Consultations
Events
Whistleblowers
Contact & Help
Toggle submenu
Contact Information
FAQs
Glossary
Breadcrumb
Home
ESMA's Activities
Digital Finance and Innovation
Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)
Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)
The Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) is an EU regulation that entered into force on 16 January 2023 and will apply as of 17 January 2025. It aims at strengthening the information and communication technology (ICT) security of financial entities in the remit of the 3 ESAs and making sure that the financial sector in Europe is able to stay resilient in the event of a severe operational digital disruption. DORA brings harmonisation of the rules relating to digital operational resilience for the financial sector applying to more than 20 different types of financial entities, of which 12 are in the remit of ESMA.
Why is DORA needed?
The financial sector is increasingly dependent on information and communication technology (ICT) tools and systems to deliver its financial services, for which they increasingly rely on ICT service providers. This may expose financial entities to potential ICT (third-party) risk because the delivery of their financial services relies on entities who are not directly supervised nor subject to the same regulatory frameworks (i.e. when the ICT service providers are not financial entities themselves).
When not managed properly, ICT risks can lead to disruptions of financial service delivery. This can have an impact on other financial entities, sectors and even on the rest of the economy, which underlines the importance of the digital operational resilience of the financial sector.
primary_grey_background
ICT risk management
A framework setting principles and requirements on ICT risk management.
white_background
ICT third-party risk management
Mitigation of ICT third-party risk; Key contractual provisions.
white_background
Digital operational resilience testing
Operational resilience testing programme encompassing a range of tests, including advanced testing.
white_background
ICT-related incidents
Management of ICT-related incidents, and notification of major ones and of significant cyber threats to competent authorities.
white_background
Information sharing
Exchange of information and intelligence on cyber threats.
white_background
Oversight of critical third-party providers
Oversight framework for ICT third-party providers that are designated as critical by the ESAs for the financial sector.
white_background
Links to DORA policy requirements
DORA requirements are set out across Level 1 legislation, Level 2 technical standards and delegated regulations and Level 3 supervisory guidance. The table below provides an overview of the relevant policy requirements by topic, as well as relevant supervisory material.
primary_grey_background
Level 1
Directive (EU) 2022/2556 as regards digital operational resilience for the financial sector
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector
Level 2
Regulatory Technical Standards (RTS)
Implementing Technical Standards (ITS)
Commission delegated regulation (CDR)
Level 3 & additional material
Guidelines and relevant material
Risk Management
Arts. 5-16; 26-30
RTS on ICT risk management and the simplified ICT risk management framework (DORA Art. 15 and 16)
RTS on contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers (DORA Art. 28.10)
ITS on standard templates for the register of information (DORA Art. 28.9)
RTS on the implementation of TLPT (DORA Art. 26.11)
RTS on subcontracting ICT services supporting critical or important functions (DORA Art. 30.5)
Preparations for reporting of DORA registers of information
Incident reporting
Arts. 17-23
RTS on the criteria for the classification of ICT-related incidents (DORA Art. 18.3)
RTS on incident notification and reports (DORA Art. 20(a))
ITS on standard forms, templates, and procedures for financial entities to report a major ICT-related incident and to notify a significant cyber threat (DORA Art. 20(b))
GL on the estimation of aggregated annual costs/losses caused by major ICT incidents (DORA Art 11.12)
Operational Instructions on DORA incident reporting
Oversight Framework
Arts. 31-44
CDR on the criteria for the designation of ICT third-party service providers as critical for financial entities (DORA Art. 31.8)
CDR on the oversight fees to be charged by the Lead Overseer to critical ICT third-party service providers (DORA Art. 43.2)
RTS on harmonisation of conditions enabling the conduct of the oversight activities (DORA Art. 41(a)(b)(d))
RTS on the composition and tasks of the joint examination team (DORA Art. 41(1)(c))
GL on cooperation between ESAs and CAs regarding the structure of the oversight (DORA Art. 32.7)
Other relevant links:
Interactive Single Rulebook
Q&As
white_background
DORA Oversight
ESMA Links
Joint ESAs Technical Advice on two EC delegated acts under the DORA specifying further criteria for critical ICT third-party service providers
Joint ESAs Consultation on the first batch of DORA policy products
Joint ESAs Consultation on the second batch of DORA policy products
Draft technical standards (Joint ESAs Final Reports) for the first batch of DORA policy products
Joint ESAs public event on DORA – Technical discussion (6 February 2023)
First joint ESAs public hearing on DORA policy products (13 July 2023)
Second joint ESAs public hearing on DORA policy products (23 January 2024)
Second batch of policy products under DORA (17 July 2024)
Joint Final report on the draft technical standards on subcontracting under DORA (26 July 2024)
ESAs Opinion on the rejection of the ITS on RoI under DORA (15 October 2024)
Decision on the information that competent authorities must report to them for the designation of critical ICT third-party service providers (8 November 2024 | Updated on 29 January 2025)
ESAs Statement on DORA application (4 December 2024)
2024 Dry Run exercise - Key findings (17 December 2024)
Report on the feasibility for further centralisation of reporting of major ICT-related incidents (17 January 2025)
ESAs Opinion on the rejection of the RTS on subcontracting under DORA (7 March 2025)
Preparing for the DORA Oversight Framework: CTPP Designation and Next Steps (14 May 2025)
Joint ESAs Report in response to the European Commission consultation pursuant to Article 58(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 (DORA) (17 December 2025)
2025 ESAs Report on major ICT-related incidents (3 June 2026)
ESAs' statement toward a consistent and risk-based approach for ICT risks from frontier AI models (31 July 2026)
ESMA is an authority of the European Union
Careers
ESMA Documents
Contact & Help
Media Corner
Cookie Policy
Data Protection
Social Media