Joint ESAs public hearing on the first batch of DORA policy
products
13 July 2023
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Programme
• 09.00 – 09:10 Opening of the conference • 11:45. – 13.00 SESSION 2: RTS to specify the policy
on ICT services performed by ICT third-party
• 09:10-09:20 Welcoming remarks
providers
José-Manuel Campa (Chairperson, EBA)
Francesco Mauro (Head of Unit, EBA)
• 09.20 – 09.35 Keynote speech
• 13.00 – 14.00 Lunch break
Gerry Cross (Chairperson, Joint Committee Sub-
• 14:00. – 16.00 SESSION 3: RTS on criteria for the
Committee on Digital Operational Resilience)
classification of ICT-related incidents
• 09.35 – 11:35 SESSION 1: RTS on ICT risk
Antonio Barzachki (Senior Policy expert, EBA)
management framework and RTS on simplified ICT
risk management framework • 16:00 – 16:15 Coffee break
Barbara Daskala (Senior Supervision Officer, ESMA) • 16.15 – 18.00 SESSION 4: ITS to establish the
templates for the register of information
• 11.35 – 11:45 Coffee break
Andrea Vetrone (Senior Expert on Supervisory
Oversight, EIOPA)
• 18.00 End of the meeting
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
2
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
How to interact with us today: Slido
1. Go to slido.com, enter event code #DORA and your full name and
organisation (e.g. “Mario Rossi (EIOPA)”).
▪ The name and organisation used for Slido and WebEx must be
identical.
2. Submit written comments/questions through Slido and upvote
questions of interest submitted by other participants.
3. If your question is very popular, we will read it during the meeting and
may ask you to raise your hand via WebEx and orally explain it.
▪ The moderator will not accept inputs which are:
▪ Submitted by people with uncompleted names
▪ Offensive
▪ Inputs related to areas of DORA not covered during this event, will be
given a lower priority compared to those in scope
▪ We will try to archive all inputs before each session.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
3
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
How to interact with us today: WebEx
1. If your input on Slido is selected and the moderator calls your name, you
will have to raise up your hand in WebEx by using the “” button
2. Once the moderator gives you the word, you will receive a prompt on your
screen to unmute yourself.
▪ Please keep your intervention to max. 2 minutes to also allow others to share their
views. Always indicate your name and organisation.
▪ Given time constraints, we kindly ask your understanding that not all participants
may get the possibility to make an oral intervention.
▪ Don’t raise up your hand unless your name is called. It doesn’t worth it!
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
4
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Welcoming remarks
José-Manuel Campa, Chairperson of EBA
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
5
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Keynote speech
Gerry Cross, Chairperson of the Joint Committee sub-committee on Digital Operational Resilience
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
6
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Purpose of the public hearing
The ESAs organise ‘public hearings’ for its Technical Standards and Guidelines to allow
interested parties to ask clarification questions.
• The purpose of the hearing is for the ESAs to present a summary of the Consultation papers (CPs),
reproduce the questions of the CP, and ask attendees whether they require additional explanations or
clarifications from ESA staff so as to be able to answer the questions in the CP.
• The public hearing does, therefore, not replace written responses to the CP, as it is only through written
responses that the ESAs are able to give the views of stakeholders the required consideration.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
7
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Timeline of the first batch policy development
DORA Submission of
entered into draft ITS to
force EC
Public
consultation
Development of Assessment of
16 Jan ‘23 Consultation Paper 19 11 Sept responses, development 17 Jan
on draft policy June ‘23 ‘23 of Final Report on draft ‘24
mandate policy mandate
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
8
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
SESSION 1: RTS on ICT risk management framework
and RTS on simplified ICT risk management framework
Barbara Daskala, Senior Supervision Officer ESMA
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
9
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the ICT Risk Management Framework RTSs
mandate
Article 15
Article 16
Further harmonisation of ICT risk management tools,
Simplified ICT risk management framework*
methods, processes and policies
a. Specify further elements to be included in the ICT security policies, a. Specify further elements to be included in the ICT risk management
procedures, protocols and tools (Article 9(2)) (Article 16(1)(a))
b. Develop further controls of access management rights and b. Specify further elements in relation to systems, protocols and tools
monitoring of anomalous behaviour (Article 9(4), point (c)) to minimise the impact of ICT risk (Article 16(1)(c))
c. Develop further mechanisms on prompt detection of anomalous c. Specify further components of the ICT business continuity plans
behaviour related to ICT risk (Article 10(1)) and triggering of (Article 16(1)(f))
incident detection and response processes(Article 10(2)) d. Specify further rules on business continuity plan testing (Article
d. Specify further ICT business continuity policy components (Article 16(1)(g))
11(1)) e. Specify further content and format of the report on the review for
e. Specify further ICT business continuity plan testing (Article 11(6)) the ICT RM framework (Article 16(2))
f. Specify further ICT response and recovery plans components
(Article 11(3)) *For small and non-interconnected investment firms, payment
g. Specify further content and format of the report on the review for institutions exempted; institutions exempted; electronic money
the ICT RM framework (Article 6(5)) institutions exempted; and small institutions for occupational
retirement provision (Article 16(1), first subparagraph)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
10
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Principles followed for both RTSs
• Principle-based, to the extent possible
• Rule-based, as appropriate to cover detail required
• Technology-agnostic
• Proportionality
• Structure close to the mandate, but also…
• Considering existing industry leading practices and standards (e.g.
ISO 27000)
• Scope differences between RTS of Article 15 and Article 16
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
11
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
DORA Chapter II (Articles 1 to 14) versus RTS 15
DDOORRAA CChhaapptteerr IIII ––IICCTT RRiisskk MMaannaaggeemmeenntt
AArrttiiccllee 1122:: BBaacckkuupp,,
AArrttiiccllee 66:: IICCTT rriisskk
AArrttiiccllee 55:: GGoovveerrnnaannccee AArrttiiccllee 77:: IICCTT ssyysstteemm,, AArrttiiccllee 88:: rreessttoorraattiioonn aanndd AArrttiiccllee 1133:: LLeeaarrnniinngg AArrttiiccllee 1144::
mmaannaaggeemmeenntt AArrttiiccllee 99:: PPrrootteeccttiioonn aanndd pprreevveennttiioonn AArrttiiccllee 1100:: DDeetteeccttiioonn AArrttiiccllee 1111:: RReessppoonnssee aanndd rreeccoovveerryy
aanndd oorrggaanniissaattiioonn pprroottooccoollss aanndd ttoooollss IIddeennttiiffiiccaattiioonn rreeccoovveerryy pprroocceedduurreess aanndd eevvoollvviinngg CCoommmmuunniiccaattiioonn
ffrraammeewwoorrkk
aanndd mmeetthhooddss
Articles 10(1) and
Article 6(5) Article 9(2) Article 9(4) point (c) Article 11(1) Article 11(3) Article 11(6)
10(2)
RTS mandate Article RTS mandate Article RTS mandate Article RTS mandateArticle RTS mandate Article RTS mandate Article RTS mandate Article
15(g) 15(a) 15(b) 15(c) 15(d) 15(f) 15(e) Complementary
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
12
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the RTSs (Titles I and I)
RTSs as mandated under Articles 15 and 16(3) of DORA
Title I Title II
Article 15 Article 16 (3)
15(a) 15(b) 15(c) 15(d,e,f) 15(g)
Chapter I:
Chapter I: ICT
Chapter II: Chapter III: ICT- Chapter IV: ICT Chapter V: Report
Simplified ICT
security policies,
Human resources related Incident Business on the ICT risk
procedures, risk
policy and access detection and continuity management
protocols, and management
control response management framework review
tools
framework
next slide
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
13
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
RTS 15 – Chapter I
Chapter I
ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools (Article 15a)
Section I Section II Section III Section IV Section V Section VI Section VII Section VIII Section IX
ICT AND INFORMATION
ENCRYPTION AND ICT PROJECT AND CHANGE PHYSICAL AND
PROVISIONS ON GOVERNANCE ICT RISK MANAGEMENT ICT ASSET MANAGEMENT ICT OPERATIONS SECURITY NETWORK SECURITY SECURITY AWARENESS AND
CRYPTOGRAPHY MANAGEMENT ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY
TRAINING
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
14
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
RTS 16 – Overview
Title II Article 16 (3)
Simplified ICT Risk management framework
Chapter I Chapter II Chapter III Chapter IV
FURTHER ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS,
ICT RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK PROTOCOLS, AND TOOLS TO MINIMISE THE ICT BUSINESS CONTINUITY MANAGEMENT REPORT ON THE REVIEW OF THE ICT RMF
IMPACT OF ICT RISK
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
15
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
PC Questions – RTS 15
Do you agree with the approach followed to incorporate proportionality in the RTS based on Article 15 of DORA (Title I of theproposed RTS)
Q1. and in particular its Article 29 (Complexity and risks considerations)? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as
General drafting principles needed.
Do you agree with the approach followed for the RTS based on Article 16 of DORA (Title II of the proposed RTS)? If not, please provide an
Q2.
indication of further proportionality considerations, detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the provisions on governance? If not, please explain and provide alternative
Provisions on governance Q3.
suggestion as necessary.
Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT risk management policy and process? If not, please explain and provide alternative
ICT risk management Q4.
suggestion.
Q5. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT asset management? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
ICT asset management Do you consider important for financial entities to keep record of the end date of the provider’s support or the date of the extended
Q6.
support of ICT assets?
Q7. Do you agree with the suggested approach on encryption and cryptography? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Encryption and cryptography
Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please
Q8.
explain and provide examples.
Q9. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT operations security? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please
Q10.
explain and provide examples.
What would be the impact on the financial entities to implement weekly automated vulnerability scans for all ICT assets, without
ICT operations security Q11.
considering their classification and overall risk profile? Please provide details and if possible, quantitative data.
Do you agree with the requirements already identified for cloud computing resources? Is there any additional measure or control that
Q12. should be considered specifically for cloud computing resources in the RTS, beyond those already identified in Article 11(2) point (k)? If yes,
please explain and provide examples.
Q13. Do you agree with the suggested approach on network security? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
Network security Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please
Q14.
explain and provide examples.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
16
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
PC Questions – RTS 15 (cont’d)
Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT project and change management? If not, please explain and provide alternative
Q15.
suggestions.
ICT project and change
Do you consider that specific elements regarding supply-chain risk should be taken into consideration in the RTS? If yes, pleaseexplain
management Q16.
and provide suggestions.
Q17. Do you agree with the specific approach proposed for CCPs and CSDs? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Do you agree with the suggested approach on physical and environmental security? If not, please explain and provide alternative
Q18.
Physical and environmental suggestions.
security Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes,
Q19.
please explain and provide examples.
ICT and information security Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT and information security awareness and training? If not, please explain and
Q20.
awareness and training provide alternative suggestions.
Do you agree with the suggested approach on Chapter II -Human resources policy and access control? If not, please explain and provide
Q21.
Human resources policy and alternative suggestion.
access control Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes,
Q22.
please explain and provide examples.
Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT-related incidents detection and response, in particular with respect to the
ICT-related incident detection and
Q23. criteria to trigger ICT-related incident detection and response process referred to in Article 24(5) of the proposed RTS? If not, please
response
explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT business continuity management? If not, please explain and provide alternative
Q24.
ICT business continuity suggestion.
management Do you agree with the suggested specific approach for CCPs, CSDs and trading venues? If not, please explain and provide alternative
Q25.
suggestion.
Report on the ICT risk Do you agree with the suggested approach on the format and content of the report on the ICT risk management framework review?If
Q26.
management framework review not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
17
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
PC Questions – RTS 16
Simplified ICT risk management Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the simplified ICT risk management framework? If not, please explain and provide
Q27.
framework alternative drafting as necessary.
Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the further elements of systems, protocols, and tools to minimise the impact of ICT
Q28.
risk under the simplified ICT risk management framework? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
Further elements of systems,
protocols, and tools to
What would be the impact for financial entities to expand the ICT operation security requirements for all ICT assets? Please provide details
minimise the impact of ICT risk Q29.
and if possible, quantitative data.
Are there any additional measures or control that should be considered specifically for cloud resources in the draft RTS, beyondthose
Q30.
already identified in Article 37(2)(h) of the proposed draft RTS? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
ICT business continuity Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT business continuity management under the simplified ICT risk management
Q31.
management framework? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
Report on the ICT risk
Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the article on Format and content of the report on the simplified ICT risk
management framework Q32.
management review? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
review
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
18
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
SESSION 2: RTS to specify the policy on ICT services
performed by ICT third-party providers
Francesco Mauro, Head of Unit EBA
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
19
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the legal mandate conferred on the ESAs
Article 28(10)
RTS to further specify the detailed content of the policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions
provided by ICT TPPs
The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, develop draft regulatory technical standards to further specify the detailed content of
the policy referred to in paragraph 2 in relation to the contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or
important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers.
Article 28 (2)
Strategy on ICT third-party risk
As part of their ICT risk management framework, financial entities, other than entities referred to in Article 16(1), first subparagraph, and
other than microenterprises, shall adopt, and regularly review, a strategy on ICT third-party risk, taking into account the multi-vendor
strategy referred to in Article 6(9), where applicable. The strategy on ICT third-party risk shall include a policy on the use of ICT
services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers and shall apply on an
individual basis and, where relevant, on a sub-consolidated and consolidated basis. The management body shall, on the basis of
an assessment of the overall risk profile of the financial entity and the scale and complexity of the business services, regularly review the
risks identified in respect to contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
20
The draft RTS in a nutshell
▪ The draft RTS sets out requirements for the policy of financial entities on their use of ICT third party service providers, including
ICT intra-group TPPs and concerns all ICT services provided by them that support C&I functions.
▪ The use of ICT service from ICT TPPs cannot reduce the responsibility for the financial entities and their management bodies to
manage their risks and to comply with legislative requirements, especially when C&I functions are supported by ICT TPPs. The
policy should clearly specify and identify the internal responsibilities for the approval, management, control and documentation of
contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services.
▪ The structure of this policy should follow all the steps of the life cycle regarding contractual arrangements, starting with the
planning phase of obtaining ICT services, including risk assessments and due diligence processes, covering the ongoing service
delivery, monitoring and auditing, and ending with the exit from such arrangements.
▪ The policy shall apply on an individual basis and, where relevant, on a sub-consolidated and consolidated basis.
➢The public consultation includes 9 questions
➢Deadline to provide your feedback: 11th September 2023 via EU Survey
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
21
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Background
Proportionality: The principle of proportionality is already embedded in the legal text (DORA Article 3) and the
application of requirements on ICT third-party risk management by financial entities shall be proportionate to their size
and overall risk profile, and to the nature, scale and complexity of their services, activities and operations.
Existing sectorial framework: The draft RTS has been developed considering already existing specifications provided
in Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements published by the ESAs and other relevant specifications provided in the
EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk management.
Intra-group TPPs: The draft RTS applies to ICT services provided by ICT intra-group service providers. As per DORA
recital (31), intra-group provision of ICT services entails specific risks and benefits however it should not be
automatically considered less risky than the provision of ICT services by providers outside of a financial group and
should therefore be subject to the same regulatory framework. However, when ICT services are provided from within
the same financial group, financial entities might have a higher level of control over intra-group providers, which ought
to be taken into account in the overall risk assessment.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
22
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of draft RTS (1/4)
Articles 1-3
The policy shall:
- Take into account elements of increased complexity or risk (e.g. location of ICT TPP, nature of data shared,
location of data processing and storage, etc.);
- Implemented consistently across the group subsidiaries, and adequate for its effective application at all relevant
levels;
- Adopted in writing and reviewed by the management body at least once a year with necessary updates;
- Define or refer to a methodology for determining which ICT services support C&I functions;
- Clearly assign the internal responsibilities for the approval, management, control, and documentation of relevant
contractual arrangements;
- Foresee assessment of ICT TPP’s resources to ensure compliance with all legal and regulatory requirements;
- Ensure consistency of relevant contractual arrangements with the financial entity’s ICT risk management
framework, information security policy, business continuity policy;
- Require independent review and inclusion in the financial entity’s audit plan.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
23
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of draft RTS (2/4)
Articles 4-6
The policy shall:
- differentiate, including for sub-contractors, between the (a) authorised or registered ICT TPPs, including ICT TPPs
subject to the oversight framework, (b) ICT intra- group TPPs and TPPs outside the group; (c) ICT TPPs located
within the EU and in third countries;
- specify the requirements for each main phase of the lifecycle of the use of such ICT services, covering at least
(a) responsibilities of the management body, (b) planning, including the risk assessment, due diligence and approval
process of new or material changes, (c) involvement of business units, internal controls and others relevant units, (d)
implementation, monitoring and management of relevant contractual arrangements, (e) documentation and record-
keeping, and (f) the exit strategies and termination processes;
- define the business needs before entering into contractual arrangements;
- require a risk assessment before entering into a relevant contractual arrangement.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
24
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of draft RTS (3/4)
Articles 7-8
The policy shall:
- specify an appropriate and proportionate process for selecting and assessing the prospective ICT TPP and
prescribe certain aspects the financial entity needs to assess for the ICT TPP, before entering into a contractual
arrangement (e.g. business reputation, expertise resources, information security standards, appropriate
organisational structure, use of sub-contractors, data location, process, storage, possibility of audits, acting on
ethical and socially responsible manner, etc.);
- specify the required level of assurance concerning the effectiveness of ICT TPPs’ risk management
framework and require the assessment of the existence of risk mitigation and business continuity measures;
- determine the due diligence process for selecting and assessing the prospective TPPs and consider certain
elements in this regard (e.g. audit reports etc.);
- specify the appropriate measures to identify, prevent and manage actual or potential conflicts of interest
arising from the use of ICT TPPs before entering relevant contractual arrangements and provide for an ongoing
monitoring of conflicts of interests.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
25
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of draft RTS (4/4)
Articles 9-11
The policy shall:
- specify the requirement for a written contractual arrangement, which shall include information access,
inspection, audit, and ICT testing rights. For this purpose, the financial entity shall use (a) its own internal audit or
an appointed third party, (b) pooled audits and pooled ICT testing, including TLPT, (c) third-party certifications and
third-party/ internal audit reports made available by the ICT TPP;
- specify whether third-party certifications and reports are adequate and sufficient to comply with financial
entities’ regulatory obligations and shall not rely solely on these reports over time. Use of these methods only
under conditions (e.g. satisfactory audit plan, sufficient coverage of systems and key controls, etc.);
- specify the measures and key indicators to monitor, on an ongoing basis, the performance of ICT TPPs,
including measures to monitor compliance, and also specify measures when service levels are not met;
- prescribe how the financial entity shall assess that the ICT TPPs meet appropriate performance and quality
standards. To document the assessment and use its results to update the financial entity's risk assessment;
- define appropriate measures in case of shortcomings and monitoring of the implementation of such measures;
- include requirements for a documented exit plan for each ICT service and their periodic review and testing.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
26
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
SESSION 3: RTS on criteria for the classification of ICT-
related incidents
Antonio Barzachki, Senior Policy Expert EBA
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
27
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Background and legal basis
DORA has introduced a harmonised and streamlined framework for reporting of major ICT-relates incidents where FEs:
• establish and implement an ICT-related incident management process to detect, manage and notify ICT-related incidents.
• report major ICT-related incidents to the competent authority by way of initial notification, intermediate report and final report.
• report, on voluntary basis and depending on the criticality of the services at risk, significant cyber threats to the relevant
competent authority under DORA.
Criteria for classification of major ICT-related incidents (Art. 18(1) DORA):
• the number and/or relevance of clients or financial counterparts affected and, where applicable, the amount or number of
transactions affected by the ICT-related incident, and whether the ICT-related incident has caused reputational impact;
• the duration of the ICT-related incident, including the service downtime;
• the geographical spread with regard to the areas affected by the ICT-related incident, particularly if it affects more than two
Member States;
• the data losses that the ICT-related incident entails, in relation to availability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of data;
• the criticality of the services affected, including the financial entity’s transactions and operations;
• the economic impact, in particular costs and losses, of the ICT-related incident in both absolute and relative terms.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
28
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the legal mandate conferred on the ESAs
Article 18(3) and (4)
RTS on criteria for classification of major ICT-related incidents and significant cyber threats
The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, and in consultation with the ECB and ENISA, develop draft RTS to further specify the
following:
a) the criteria set out in paragraph 1, including materiality thresholds for determining major ICT-related incidents or, as
applicable, major operational or security payment-related incidents, that are subject to the reporting obligation laid
down in Article 19(1);
b) the criteria to be applied by competent authorities for the purpose of assessing the relevance of major ICT-related
incidents or, as applicable, major operational or security payment-related incidents, to relevant competent authorities in
other Member States’, and the details of reports of major ICT-related incidents or, as applicable, major operational or
security payment-related incidents, to be shared with other competent authorities pursuant to Article 19(6) and (7)
c) the criteria set out in paragraph 2 of this Article, including high materiality thresholds for determining significant cyber
threats.
The ESAs shall take into account the proportionality criteria set out in Article 4(2) DORA and international standards, guidance
and specifications developed and published by ENISA.
Deadline to deliver – 12 months
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
29
Classification of ICT-related incidents – general approach
Approach for classification of
major ICT-related incidents
(Art. 8)
The CP proposes to classify
incidents as major if any of
the following conditions are
fulfilled:
• the classification thresholds
of two primary criteria
have been met; or
• the classification thresholds
of three or more criteria
have been met, including at
least one primary criterion.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
30
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Classification of ICT-related incidents – criteria & thresholds
Criterion Specification of the criterion Materiality threshold
1. Affected clients, financial
counterparts, transactions
(Art. 1 and 9)
• Number of affected All affected clients making use of the service. 10% of all clients, or
clients Covering both natural and legal persons. 50 000 clients
• Number of affected All affected financial counterparts having concluded a
10% of all financial counterparts
financial counterparts contractual arrangement with the FE related to the service.
• Number of affected 15 000 000 EUR, or
Transactions with monetary value.
transactions 10% of regular level of transactions,
• Relevant clients or The impact will affect the business objectives of the FE or
Any impact (yes/no)
financial counterparts market efficiency.
Take into account level of visibility, in particular:
- Media attention
2. Reputational impact
- Complaints received from different stakeholders Any impact (yes/no)
(Art. 2 and 10)
- Compliance with regulatory requirements
- Loss of clients or financial counterparts
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
31
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Classification of ICT-related incidents – criteria & thresholds
Criterion Specification of the criterion Materiality threshold
3. Duration and service
downtime (Art. 3 and 11)
Measured from the moment the incident occurs until the
• Duration of the incident 24 h
moment when it is resolved.
Measured from the moment the service is unavailable to 2 h for ICT services supporting critical
• Service downtime clients/financial counterparts to the moment when regular functions (unless stricter req. stem
activities have been restored. from DORA or other EU law)
Impact in at least two Member States on:
- clients or financial counterparts; or
4. Geographical spread - branches of the financial entity; or
Any impact (yes/no)
(Art. 4 and 12) - FEs within the group; or
- financial market infrastructures; or
- third-party providers common with other FEs.
Clarification of the data losses that the incident entails in Any significant impact (yes/no) on
5. Data losses (Art. 5 and
relation to the availability, authenticity, integrity and/or critical data (impact on business
13)
confidentiality of data. objectives and compliance)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
32
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Classification of ICT-related incidents – criteria & thresholds
Criterion Specification of the criterion Materiality threshold
6. Critical Any impact (yes/no) and
Impact on the activities that require authorisation, or ICT services that
services affected escalation to senior management
support critical or important functions.
(Art. 6 and 14) or management body
The following types of direct or indirect costs and losses to be taken into
account
• expropriated funds or financial assets for which the financial entity is
liable, including assets lost to theft;
• replacement or relocation costs of software, hardware or infrastructure;
7. Economic Gross costs and losses higher
• staff costs;
impact (Art. 7 than 100 000 EUR
• fees due to non-compliance with contractual obligations;
and 15)
• customer redress and compensation costs;
• losses due to forgone revenues;
• costs associated with internal and external communication;
• advisory costs.
FEs shall not take into account costs for running the business as usual.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
33
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Recurring incidents, significant cyber threats, relevance to
other jurisdictions and information to be shared
Recurring incidents (Art. 16)
• Recurring incidents that individually do not constitute a major incident shall be considered as one major incident where the
incidents, in aggregate and over a period of the preceding 3 months, meet the classification criteria and thresholds.
• The recurring incidents shall occur at least twice, have the same apparent root cause and shall be with similar nature and impact.
Criteria and thresholds for determining significant cyber threats (Art. 17)
Conditions to be met for cyber incidents to be considered significant:
• the cyber threat could affect critical or important functions of the financial entity, other financial entities, third party providers,
clients or financial counterparts;
• the cyber threat has a high probability of materialisation (risks, capabilities and intent of threat actors, persistence of the threat
and any accrued knowledge) at the financial entity or other financial entities; and
• the cyber threat could fulfil the conditions for major ICT-related incidents if it materialises.
Relevance to competent authorities in other Member States (Art. 18) – same approach as ‘geographical spread criterion’.
Details of major incidents to be reported to other authorities (Art. 19) – all data reported to the CA, without any anonymization.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
34
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the questions asked
Question 1. Do you agree with the overall approach for classification of major incidents under DORA? If not, please provide your
reasoning and alternative approach(es) you would suggest.
Questions 2-5. Do you agree with the specification and materiality thresholds of the classification criteria as proposed in Articles
1-7 and 9-15 of the draft RTS? If not, please provide your reasoning and suggested changes.
Question 6. Do you agree with capturing recurring incidents with same apparent root cause, similar nature and impact, that in
aggregate meet the classification criteria and thresholds as major incidents under DORA, as proposed in Article 16? If not, please
provide your reasoning and suggested changes. Please also indicate how often you face recurring incidents, which in aggregate
meet the materiality thresholds only over a period of 6 to 12 months based on data from the previous two years (you may also
indicate the number of these recurring incidents).
Question 7. Do you agree with the approach for classification of significant cyber threats as proposed in Articles 17? If not, please
provide your reasoning and suggested changes.
Question 8. Do you agree with the approach for assessment of relevance of the major incidents in other Member States and the
level of details to be shared with other authorities, as proposed in Articles 18 and 19? If not, please provide your reasoning and
suggested changes.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
35
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
SESSION 4: ITS to establish the templates for the
register of information
Andrea Vetrone, Senior Expert on Supervisory Oversight EIOPA
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
36
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the legal mandate conferred on the ESAs
Article 28(9)
ITS on Register of Information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by
ICT third–party service providers
The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, develop draft implementing technical standards to establish the standard templates for the
purposes of the register of information referred to in paragraph 3, including information that is common to all contractual
arrangements on the use of ICT services.
Article 28 (3)
Register of Information
As part of their ICT risk management framework, financial entities shall maintain and update at entity level and, at sub-consolidated
and consolidated levels, a Register of Information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided
by ICT third-party service providers.
The contractual arrangements referred to in the first subparagraph shall be appropriately documented, distinguishing between those that
cover ICT services supporting critical or important functions and those that do not.
Financial entities shall report at least yearly to the competent authorities information on the number of new arrangements on the use of
ICT services, the categories of ICT third-party service providers, the type of contractual arrangements and the services and functions
which are being provided.
Financial entities shall make available to the competent authority, upon its request, the full Register of Information or as requested,
specified sections thereof, along with any information deemed necessary to enable the effective supervision of the financial entity.
Financial entities shall inform the competent authority in a timely manner about any planned contractual arrangement on the use of ICT
services concerning critical or important functions and when a function has become critical or important.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
37
Purpose of the register of information
As part of their ICT risk management framework, financial entities shall maintain and
Financial entities ICT update at entity level and, at sub-consolidated and consolidated levels, a Register of
risk management Information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services
provided by ICT third-party service providers. (Art 28.3)
Financial entities shall make available to the competent authority, upon its request, the
Supervision by
full Register of Information […] along with any information deemed necessary to enable
competent authorities
the effective supervision of the financial entity (Art. 28.3)
To enhance supervisory awareness of ICT third-party dependencies, and with a view to
further supporting the work in the context of the Oversight Framework established by
Designation of critical
this Regulation, all financial entities should be required to maintain a register of information
third-party providers
with all contractual arrangements about the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party
service providers. (Recital 65)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
38
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
The draft ITS and the Register of Information in a nutshell
▪ The draft ITS is technology agnostic and does not cover the process of sharing information from FEs to CAs and from the CAs to
the Oversight Forum. However, templates and requirements have been designed a data management (relational structure) and
reporting perspective to ensure consistency and harmonisation by design.
▪ Almost each template is a table with a predefined number of columns but an indefinite number of rows (open table).
▪ Templates are proportionate by design, since the quantity of information to be included depends on the extent of FE’s dependency on
services provided by ICT TPPs. Additional information to be reported only if the ICT service supports critical or important functions.
▪ Design of the templates leverage on the lessons learned of ESAs and CAs data collection on outsourcing and third-party
arrangements.
▪ The templates included in the draft ITS aim to identify:
a) minimum and necessary information on contractual arrangements and on risk assessment and due diligence performed by FEs
b) the link between functions of the FEs and ICT services provided by ICT TPPs
c) the ICT service supply chain with a focus on material subcontractors
d) unambiguously and consistently the ICT TPPs (incl. subcontractors) and the FEs by using a Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) code
▪ Each FE shall maintain and update a register of information at (i) entity level; (ii) sub-consolidated level and consolidated level. The
scope of (sub)consolidation is defined by the ultimate parent undertaking taking into account the applicable financial regulations.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
39
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Structure of the templates (entity level)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
40
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Structure of the templates
(sub-consolidated and consolidated level)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
41
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
ICT service supply chain in a nutshell
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
42
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Example: ICT service supply chain
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
43
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Example: ICT service supply chain 1 – from financial entity B
perspective
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
44
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Example: ICT service supply chain 2 – from financial entity E
perspective
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
45
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Example: ICT service supply chains 1 + 2 – from
consolidated perspective
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
46
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Overview of the consultation questions
▪ The consultation paper (CP) includes 14 questions covering the following areas:
▪ Use of the LEI code;
▪ Inclusion of all material sub-contractors in the scope of the register of information, consideringArticle 28(3) of DORA;
▪ First implementation of the register of information;
▪ Requirement to keep information on terminated arrangements for 5 years;
▪ Register of information at (sub)consolidated level;
▪ Inclusion of information on the annual expenses / budget of the contractual arrangement;
▪ ICT service supply chain;
▪ Taxonomy of ICT services;
▪ Instructions to report the total value of assets and the value of other financial indicator;
▪ The overall structure of, the level of information requested in, and the principle used to draft the register of information;
▪ The conclusions of the impact assessment.
▪ The CP invites also the stakeholders to provide feedback on each of the columns of each templates via dedicated Excel file
(downloadable from and to be uploaded after in the EU Survey)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
47
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Next steps
DORA policy work Article Public consultation Finalise
Call for advice on criticality criteria and fees 31.8 | 43.2 26 May - 23 June 23 30 Sept 2023
RTS on ICT risk management framework 15
H
C RTS on simplified ICT risk management framework 16
T
A
B RTS on criteria for the classification of ICT-related incidents 18.3 19 June - 11 Sept 23 17 Jan 2024
T
S
R ITS to establish the templates for the Register of information 28.9
I
F
RTS to specify the policy on ICT services performed by 3rd party 28.1
RTS on specifying the reporting of major ICT-related incidents 20.a
ITS to establish the reporting details for major ICT-related incidents 20.b
H
C
T Guidelines on the estimation of aggregated costs/losses caused by major ICTrelated incidents 11.11
A
B
D RTS to specify threat led penetration testing aspects 26.11 Nov/Dec 23 - TBC 17 June 2024
N
O
C RTS to specify elements when sub-contracting critical or important functions 30.5
E
S
GL on cooperation between ESAs and CAs regarding the structure of the oversight 32.7
RTS to specify information on oversight conduct 41
Feasibility report on single EU Hub for major ICT-related events 21 TBC 17 January 2025
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
48
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Annex
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES
Q&A on Regulation
• The objective of ESAs Question and Answer process on regulation (Q&A process) is to ensure consistent and effective
application of European regulation and to foster supervisory convergence in the EEA within the ESAs respective scope of
action, including DORA.
• Any natural or legal person, including financial institutions, competent authorities and Union institutions and bodies can use the
Q&A process for submitting questions relating to the practical application or implementation of the applicable laws, regulations
and guidelines.
– ESMA’s Questions and Answers (europa.eu)
– EBA’s Questions and Answers (europa.eu)
– EIOPA’s Questions and Answers (europa.eu)
JOINT COMMITTEE OF THE EUROPEAN
50
SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES