JC 2023 39
13 06 2023
Consultation Paper
on Draft Regulatory Technical Standards
to further harmonise ICT risk management tools, methods,
processes and policies as mandated under Articles 15 and 16(3) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554
0
Contents
1. Responding to this consultation Error! Bookmark not defined.
2. Executive Summary Error! Bookmark not defined.
3. Background 6
4. Draft regulatory technical standards 32
5. Annex I: Draft impact assessment 78
6. Annex II: Overview of the questions for consultation 84
1
1. Responding to this consultation
The three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) invite comments on all matters in this paper and
on the specific questions summarised in Annex II.
Comments are most helpful if they:
▪ respond to the question stated;
▪ indicate the specific point to which a comment relates;
▪ contain a clear rationale;
▪ provide evidence to support the views expressed/ rationale proposed; and
▪ describe any alternative regulatory choices the EBA should consider.
Submission of responses
To submit your comments, click on the ‘send your comments’ button on the consultation page
by 11.09.2023. Please note that comments submitted after this deadline, or submitted via other means
may not be processed.
Publication of responses
All contributions received will be published following the close of the consultation, unless you request
otherwise. Please clearly and prominently indicate in your submission any part you do not wish to be
publicly disclosed. A standard confidentiality statement in an email message will not be treated as a
request for non-disclosure. A confidential response may be requested from us in accordance with the
ESAs’ rules on access to documents. We may consult you if we receive such a request. Any decision we
make not to disclose the response is reviewable by ESAs’ Boards of Appeal and the European
Ombudsman.
Data protection
The protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the ESAs is based on
Regulation (EU) 1725/2018 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018. Further
information on data protection can be found under the Legal notice section of EBA, EIOPA and ESMA
websites respectively.
2
2. Executive Summary
Reasons for publication
1. Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December
2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending Regulations (EC)
No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011
(hereinafter ‘DORA’) tasks the ESAs, under its Article 15, to develop draft regulatory technical
standards (‘RTS’) aiming at ‘further harmonisation of ICT risk management tools, methods,
processes and policies’ and under its Article 16, to develop a simplified ICT risk management
framework for certain financial entities.
2. The ESAs have prepared this Consultation Paper (CP) to consult interested parties for the
purpose of elaborating its draft RTS to be submitted to the European Commission (EC).
Respondents to this consultation are encouraged to provide the relevant background
information, and qualitative and quantitative data on costs and benefits, as well as concrete
redrafting proposals, to support their arguments where alternative ways forward are called
for. If respondents envisage any technical difficulties in implementing the proposed
requirements, they are encouraged to provide details regarding the specific technical and
operational challenges and specify the costs involved, which are important for the cost-benefit
analysis.
Contents
3. Section 3 presents the background to our proposal and questions for your consideration and
Section 4 includes our proposed draft RTS. Annex I includes a preliminary impact assessment
and Annex II lists all questions formulated in this consultation.
Next steps
4. The ESAs will consider the feedback received to this consultation in Q3/Q4 2023 and should
publish a Final Report and the submission of the draft RTS to the European Commission by 17
January 2024.
5. The ESAs will finalise the impact assessment regarding the proposed measures, to be included
in the Final Report to be submitted to the EC. Due to the limitation of the information available,
a more in-depth cost-benefit analysis will be provided after input of stakeholders. The input
from stakeholders will help the ESAs in finalising the RTS and the relevant impact assessment.
Therefore, respondents to this consultation are strongly encouraged to provide solutions for
any problems raised and to support the drafting proposals with relevant data.
3
Legislative references
Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 23 July 2014 on improving securities settlement in the European Union
CSDR and on central securities depositories and amending Directives 98/26/EC and
2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 (OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 1–
772)
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/392 of 11 November 2016
supplementing Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 of the European Parliament and
CSDR RTS 2017/392 of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards on authorisation,
supervisory and operational requirements for central securities depositories
(JO L 65 du 10.3.2017, p. 48–115)
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector
DORA and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No
600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011 (OJ L 333, 27.12.2022, p.
1–79)
Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
EMIR of 4 July 2012 on OTC derivatives, central counterparties and trade
repositories (OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 1–59)
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 153/2013 of 19 December 2012
supplementing Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and
EMIR RTS 2013/153
of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards on requirements
for central counterparties (JO L 52 du 23.2.2013, p. 41–74)
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/584 of 14 July 2016
supplementing Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the
MIFID 2 RTS 2017/584 Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying
organisational requirements of trading venues (JO L 87 du 31.3.2017, p. 350–
367)
Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 December 2022 on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity
NIS2 Directive across the Union, amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU)
2018/1972, and repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (OJ L 333, 27.12.2022, p.
80–152)
4
Acronyms used
Basel
Committee
BCBS
on Banking
Supervision
Bank for
BIS International
Settlements
European
System of
ESCB
Central
Banks
National
NCA Competent
Authority
National
Institute of
NIST Standards
and
Technology
Regulatory
RTS Technical
Standards
5
3. Background
2.1 Introduction
1. DORA sets out uniform requirements for the security of network and information systems of
companies and organisations operating in the financial sector as well as critical third parties which
provide ICT (Information and Communication Technologies) services to them, such as cloud
computing or data analytics services. DORA creates a regulatory framework on digital operational
resilience, whereby all financial entities need to make sure they can withstand, respond to, and
recover from all types of ICT-related disruptions and threats. These requirements are homogenous
across the EU, with the core aim to prevent and mitigate cyber threats.
2. The ESAs, through the Joint Committee, in consultation with the European Union Agency on
Cybersecurity (ENISA) were empowered to deliver two draft RTSs on certain aspects of the ICT risk
management under Articles 15 and 16 of DORA.
3. To do so, the ESAs have duly considered the following existing European and international
standards on ICT risk management: EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk management (2019),
EIOPA Guidelines on ICT security and governance (2020), NIS2 Directive and the NIST cybersecurity
framework components, as well as ISO-IEC 27000 family standards, 2020 FSB CIRR toolkit, the G7
Fundamental Elements of Cyber security in the financial sector, CPMI-IOSCO Guidance on cyber
resilience for financial market infrastructures, the BCBS principles for operational resilience and
sound management of operational risk, effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting.
4. The draft RTSs developed under Article 15 and Article 16(3) of DORA need to be understood as
complementary to the requirements set out in DORA itself.
5. It is important to note that the mandate given to the ESAs pursuant to Article 15 of DORA is limited
to the identification of further elements in certain areas of: ICT risk management framework (Article
6), Protection and Prevention (Article 9), Detection (Article 10), and Response and recovery (Article
11), as presented in the graph below. This means that, for the financial entities that are not subject
to Article 16 of DORA, the implementation and supervision of their compliance with the Chapter II
of DORA (ICT risk management) will consider requirements set out in DORA Articles 1 to 14,
alongside with those of the RTS mandated under Article 15 of DORA.
6
DORA Chapter II –ICT Risk Management
Article 12:
Backup,
Article 5: Article 6:
Article 7: restoration Article 13:
Governanc ICT risk Article 8: Article 14:
ICT system, Article 9: Protection and Article 10: and Learning
e and manageme Identificati Article 11: Response and recovery Communic
protocols prevention Detection recovery and
organisatio nt on ation
and tools procedures evolving
n framework
and
methods
Articles
Article
Article 10(1) Article Article Article
Article 6(5) 9(4) point
9(2) and 11(1) 11(3) 11(6)
(c)
10(2)
RTS RTS RTS RTS RTS RTS RTS
mandate mandate mandate mandate mandate mandate mandate
Article Article Article Article Article Article Article
15(g) 15(a) 15(b) 15(c) 15(d) 15(f) 15(e)
6. DORA and the draft RTS developed under Articles 15 and 16(3) of the same Regulation together are
carrying over several provisions related to ICT and security risk management/digital operational
resilience from existing relevant sectoral EU guidelines (EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk
management (2019), EIOPA Guidelines on ICT security and governance (2020). Therefore, it will be
assessed in due course how the existing sectoral EU regulatory framework will need to be amended
to align with DORA and its respective RTS, and to supplement it with further convergence tools, if
deemed necessary.
7. The draft RTS contained in this CP deals with specific requirements that are part of the broader
framework on ICT risk management and digital operational resilience as designed in DORA. The
ESAs attach a lot of importance to ensuring strong ICT risk management and control frameworks in
financial entities, and would like to ensure that any elements identified provide a clear and coherent
picture towards the effective implementation of these frameworks. To this effect, the ESAs are
currently considering whether, how and what further guidance to provide to the market on the
interaction between the requirements to be included in the draft RTS and the other requirements
relating to the ICT risk management framework that are contained in DORA and are directly
applicable (and whether there is a need for further specification outside of the Delegated
Regulations).
8. In that respect, the ESAs welcome feedback on this point, identifying any bespoke areas for such
consideration. They then will assess carefully the responses to the CP in order to: (i) ensure that the
requirements of the draft RTS are clear and proportionate, and (ii) identify and prioritise the areas
on which further guidance to the market would be appropriate, if any.
7
2.2 Architecture of the proposed draft RTS
2.2.1 One joint RTS on ICT risk management, two titles
9. The ESAs’ mandates under Article 15 and Article 16(3) of DORA both relate to the area of ICT risk
management framework by detailing specific elements applicable to the financial entities in
accordance with Article 15 of DORA or by designing the simplified ICT risk management framework
for the financial entities set out in Article 16(1) of the same regulation.
10. To ensure coherence between those provisions, which should enter into force at the same time, it
is proposed to include all the regulatory technical standards required by Article 15, fourth
subparagraph, and Article 16(3), fourth subparagraph of DORA, into a single RTS.
11. The proposed RTS is therefore divided into two titles, respectively addressing each of the mandates.
2.2.2 Structure of the proposed RTSs
12. The structure of the proposed RTSs largely follows the empowerments granted to the ESAs under
Article 15 and Article 16(3) of DORA. At the same time, to facilitate the implementation and
supervision of the requirements, the RTS has been structured in a way to allow for the integration
of existing European or international frameworks on ICT and information security already widely
used, acknowledged and tested by the industry and supervised by the CAs to ensure alignment with
said standards (please refer to point 3 for those). The following graph presents a high-level mapping
of the structure of the proposed RTSs with the structure of the empowerments under Articles 15
and 16(3) of DORA.
RTS as mandated under Articles 15 and 16(3) of DORA
Title II
Title I
Article 15
Article 16 (3)
15(a) 15(b) 15(c) 15(d,e,f) 15(g)
Chapter I: Chapter II: Chapter III: Chapter V:
Chapter I:
ICT security Human ICT-related Chapter IV: Report on
Simplified ICT
policies, Resources Incident ICT Business the ICT risk
Risk
procedures, Policy and Detection continuity management
management
protocols, Access and management framework
framework
and tools control Response review
8
2.3 General drafting principles
2.3.1 Technology-neutral
13. The ESAs consider that the RTS should remain technology-neutral and should not identify specific
products or technologies. Such approach should ensure that the legal text remains future-proof to
the extent possible, thus avoiding the need of frequent revisions.
2.3.2 Cross-sectoral
14. Given the wide scope of DORA in terms of entities in scope, and in order to keep the framework as
simple as possible, the proposed RTS tends to include requirements applicable to all the entities
within the scope of DORA (i.e. sector-agnostic and principle-based requirements).
15. This does not however exclude that, where needed, entity-specific requirements would be
included. In particular, recital 103 of DORA states that ‘the scope of the relevant articles related to
operational risk, upon which empowerments laid down in Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No
648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014, and (EU) 2016/1011 had mandated the adoption
of delegated and implementing acts, should be narrowed down with a view to carry over into this
Regulation all provisions covering the digital operational resilience aspects which today are part of
those Regulations’.
16. This is the basis for the introduction of certain requirements specific to CCPs, CSDs and trading
venues in the proposed RTS which are more stringent than DORA requirements and are considered
appropriate to keep in DORA Level 2. More details on these requirements are provided below in
the relevant chapters or sections incorporating them.
2.3.3 Proportionality
17. The proposed draft RTS includes the proportionality principle, both with reference to the part based
on the mandate in Article 15 of DORA and to the part based on Article 16 of DORA, which itself
already embeds proportionality considerations as it designs a simplified regime for certain entities.
18. The ESAs, in line with mandate in Articles 15, second paragraph, and 16(3), second paragraph of
DORA, have to take into consideration the size and the overall risk profile of the financial entity,
and the nature, scale and complexity of its services, activities and operations when developing the
draft RTSs.
19. In the case of the RTS developed under Article 16(3), the approach chosen by the ESAs to ensure
the principle of proportionality has been to identify areas on which specific elements of complexity
may require adapting the relevant policies and procedures.
20. In order to ensure a correct adaptation of the RTS to the different typologies of financial entities
and to obtain adequate feedback on this point, it will be extremely useful to receive feedback during
the consultation process both for the draft RTS based on Article 15 and for the draft RTS based on
9
Article 16 of DORA, from the largest number of financial entities, in particular from those that could
be linked to a possible reduction of the requirements based on their size, risk profile, nature, scale
and complexity of their services, activities and operations.
Q1. Do you agree with the approach followed to incorporate proportionality in the RTS based on
Article 15 of DORA (Title I of the proposed RTS) and in particular its Article 29 (Complexity
and risks considerations)? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative
wording as needed.
Q2. Do you agree with the approach followed for the RTS based on Article 16 of DORA (Title II of
the proposed RTS)? If not, please provide an indication of further proportionality
considerations, detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
2.4 Title I: Further harmonisation of ICT risk management tools,
methods, processes and policies (Article 15)
Mandate under Article 15 of DORA
The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, in consultation with the European Union Agency on
Cybersecurity (ENISA), develop common draft regulatory technical standards in order to:
(a) specify further elements to be included in the ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and
tools referred to in Article 9(2), with a view to ensuring the security of networks, enable
adequate safeguards against intrusions and data misuse, preserve the availability, authenticity,
integrity and confidentiality of data, including cryptographic techniques, and guarantee an
accurate and prompt data transmission without major disruptions and undue delays;
(b) develop further components of the controls of access management rights referred to in Article
9(4), point (c), and associated human resource policy specifying access rights, procedures for
granting and revoking rights, monitoring anomalous behaviour in relation to ICT risk through
appropriate indicators, including for network use patterns, hours, IT activity and unknown
devices;
(c) develop further the mechanisms specified in Article 10(1) enabling a prompt detection of
anomalous activities and the criteria set out in Article 10(2) triggering ICT-related incident
detection and response processes;
(d) specify further the components of the ICT business continuity policy referred to in Article 11(1);
(e) specify further the testing of ICT business continuity plans referred to in Article 11(6) to ensure
that such testing duly takes into account scenarios in which the quality of the provision of a
critical or important function deteriorates to an unacceptable level or fails, and duly considers
the potential impact of the insolvency, or other failures, of any relevant ICT third-party service
provider and, where relevant, the political risks in the respective providers’ jurisdictions;
10
(f) specify further the components of the ICT response and recovery plans referred to in Article
11(3);
(g) specifying further the content and format of the report on the review of the ICT risk
management framework referred to in Article 6(5);
When developing those draft regulatory technical standards, the ESAs shall take into account the
size and the overall risk profile of the financial entity, and the nature, scale and complexity of its
services, activities and operations, while duly taking into consideration any specific feature arising
from the distinct nature of activities across different financial services sectors.
21. This mandate is covered under the first title of the proposed draft RTS. Its scope is limited to a
coherent harmonisation of some of the requirements already identified in the DORA Chapter II,
Section II, ICT Risk Management framework. It is important to note that, unlike the Guidelines on
ICT risk management issued by the EBA and EIOPA, the purpose of this RTS is not to design a
complete ICT risk management framework; rather, it is focused on introducing only certain specific
elements.
22. In addition, the mandate also requires in certain areas to provide more detailed information on
some aspects than those covered in the existing ESAs Guidelines (e.g. detection mechanisms for
anomalous activities, criteria triggering ICT-related incident detection and response, etc.). This also
means that some articles will include more details than others.
23. Title I is divided into five chapters: ICT security, human resources policy and access control, ICT-
related incident detection and response, ICT business continuity management, and report on the
ICT risk management framework review.
24. The approach followed for each of these chapters is presented below.
2.4.1 Chapter I: ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools
25. The purpose of this chapter is to cover the mandate established in Article 15 (a) of DORA, which
requires specifying further elements to be included in the ICT security policies, procedures,
protocols and tools referred to in Article 9(2) of DORA. The latter requires financial entities to
“design, procure and implement ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools that that aim
to ensure the resilience, continuity and availability of ICT systems, in particular those supporting
critical or important functions, and to maintain high standards of availability, authenticity, integrity
and confidentiality of data, whether at rest, in use or in transit”.
11
Chapter I
ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools (Article 15a)
Section I Section II Section III Section IV Section V Section VI Section VII Section VIII Section IX
ICT AND
ENCRYPTION ICT PROJECT PHYSICAL AND INFORMATION
PROVISIONS ON ICT RISK ICT ASSET ICT OPERATIONS NETWORK
AND AND CHANGE ENVIRONMENTA SECURITY
GOVERNANCE MANAGEMENT MANAGEMENT SECURITY SECURITY
CRYPTOGRAPHY MANAGEMENT L SECURITY AWARENESS
AND TRAINING
26. The objective, therefore, of the ESAs is to identify elements additional to the above-mentioned in
Article 9(2) of DORA ensuring the security of networks, safeguards against intrusions and data
misuse, preserving the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data, and
guaranteeing an accurate and prompt data transmission without major disruptions and undue
delays.
27. Based on this mandate, the ESAs have identified key elements of the ICT risk management
framework that would assist in achieving the above objective. As the mandate is for the
development of additional elements, the different articles included in this chapter complement the
requirements already included in DORA.
28. For ease of reading and implementation, and considering the standards referred to in paragraph 3,
the chapter has been divided into 9 different sections, which are detailed below.
2.4.1.1 Section I: Provisions on governance
29. This section is divided in two articles: Article 1 presents general elements of ICT security policies,
making the link between ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools and the ICT risk
management framework defined by the financial entities.
30. This article elaborates on the main ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools that shall
be considered and which are detailed in the rest of the chapter, as an integral part of the ICT Risk
management framework. The focus is on ensuring the security of networks, enabling adequate
safeguards against intrusion and misuse of data, preserving the availability, authenticity, integrity
and confidentiality of data, including cryptographic techniques, and ensuring accurate and prompt
data transmission without major interruptions or undue delays, in line with the provisions of Article
15(a) of DORA.
31. Article 2 of the proposed draft RTS details the minimum list of tasks and responsibilities to be
assigned to the control function referred to in Article 6(4) of DORA.
Q3. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the provisions on governance? If not,
please explain and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
12
2.4.1.2 Section II: ICT risk management
32. The purpose of this section is to outline the minimum requirements applicable to financial entities
regarding the development and documentation of their ICT risk management policy and
procedures. The ICT risk management policy is essential for ensuring the preservation of data and
systems availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality and should be embedded in the
overall ICT risk management framework of financial entities. The ESAs consider the financial
entities’ ICT risk management policy should include all elements specified in Article 3 of the
proposed draft RTS.
33. Financial entities should be obligated to establish an ICT risk management policy that includes the
necessary measures and procedures for effectively managing ICT risk. This policy should clearly
define the approved risk tolerance levels for each type of risk identified. By establishing risk
tolerance levels, financial entities can assess and manage their exposure to ICT risk effectively.
34. By adhering to the provisions outlined in this Section in conjunction with the provisions on ICT risk
management outlined in DORA itself, financial entities can establish a robust ICT risk management
policy that enables them to proactively address and mitigate ICT risk, safeguard data, and maintain
the overall security and resilience of their operations.
35. In particular, financial entities should establish a process and a methodology to conduct the ICT
risk assessment. The process and the methodology must identify vulnerabilities and threats that
affect or may affect business functions, ICT systems, and supporting ICT assets. They must also
include quantitative or qualitative indicators to measure the impact and likelihood of occurrence of
these vulnerabilities and threats. It should be noted that the requirements on the ICT risk
assessment should be read and implemented in conjunction with Article 8 of DORA on
identification.
36. Financial entities should have a comprehensive and systematic approach to treating ICT risk
identified through the ICT risk assessment. By identifying and implementing appropriate measures
and regularly monitoring their effectiveness, financial entities can mitigate and manage ICT risk in
line with their risk tolerance levels. This contributes to the overall resilience and security of their
ICT systems and operations.
37. Also, financial entities should have a structured approach to identify, accept, document and review
residual risks. The residual risks should be integrated within the broader risk management process
of financial entities so that they can maintain a comprehensive understanding of their risk profile
and make informed decisions regarding risk acceptance and mitigation. Financial entities should
also identify who is responsible to accept the residual risks. The structured approach put in place
contributes to the overall effectiveness of their ICT risk management efforts and strengthens their
resilience against potential threats.
13
38. As part of their ICT risk management process, financial entities are responsible for monitoring any
changes occurring within their ICT environment. This includes monitoring internal and external
vulnerabilities and threats that may pose risks to their ICT systems and operations. By actively
monitoring these factors, financial entities can stay vigilant and identify any changes that may
increase or alter their ICT risk profile.
39. Furthermore, financial entities are expected to monitor their ICT risk to ensure they have an up-to-
date understanding of their risk landscape. This involves tracking and assessing the various risks
associated with their ICT systems, applications, and infrastructure. By doing so, financial entities
can identify emerging risks and take proactive measures to mitigate or manage them effectively.
40. Another crucial aspect of the ICT risk monitoring is its alignment with ICT risk monitoring with
changes in the business strategy and digital operational resilience strategy. Financial entities are
required to verify at least once a year that any changes to their business strategy and digital
operational resilience strategy are appropriately considered in their ICT risk monitoring efforts. This
ensures that the monitoring activities remain relevant and aligned with the evolving objectives and
priorities of the organization.
41. Finally, in addition to the reviews of their ICT risk management framework mandated under Article
6(5) of DORA, to ensure the ongoing effectiveness of the ICT risk management process, financial
entities shall conduct additional reviews when triggered by significant changes to the cyber threat
landscape, ICT services, ICT assets supporting business functions and update their ICT risk
management policies and procedures.
Q4. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT risk management policy and process? If
not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
2.4.1.3 Section III: ICT asset management
42. One of the basic and initial steps in ensuring that the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data is preserved, is the correct identification and classification of ICT assets and
information assets. Without a correct identification and classification, it is very difficult to have a
correct knowledge of these assets and a correct adaptation of the rest of the elements of the ICT
risk management framework to them. In this line, Article 8(1) of DORA establishes that as part of
the ICT risk management framework, financial entities shall identify, classify and adequately
document, among others, their information assets and ICT assets.
43. Section III elaborates on the requirements of Article 8 of DORA through two articles. The first article
requires financial entities to establish a policy for the management of ICT assets, complementing
the elements already included in Article 8(6) of DORA with respect to the inventory of the ICT assets
and information assets.
14
44. The second article focuses on the additional elements to be considered by financial entities when
defining and implementing a procedure to perform the criticality assessment of the information
and ICT assets.
Q5. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT asset management? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestion.
Q6. Do you consider important for financial entities to keep record of the end date of the
provider’s support or the date of the extended support of ICT assets?
2.4.1.4 Section IV: Encryption and cryptography
45. Encryption plays a critical role in safeguarding sensitive data and protecting the integrity,
confidentiality, and availability of ICT systems and data. By employing strong encryption algorithms
and implementing cryptographic controls, financial entities can significantly reduce the risk of data
breaches and unauthorized data manipulation. Encryption also ensures the confidentiality and
privacy of communications and information within the financial entity. It prevents unauthorized
interception and eavesdropping, ensuring that sensitive data remains confidential and only
accessible to authorized individuals.
46. Under the first article of this section, Article 6 (Encryption and cryptography), financial entities are
required to establish a comprehensive policy on encryption and cryptographic controls,
incorporating key elements to effectively manage these security measures. When determining
encryption requirements, they should consider data classification and ICT risk assessment results.
This policy should also cover the encryption of internal network connections and traffic with
external parties, considering data criticality and classification.
47. Proposed Article 6 uses the term “leading practices” on purpose, acknowledging that there may be
multiple approaches that are effective and that organizations should strive to identify and adopt
the most effective practices for their specific circumstances. Such terminology also suggests a
forward-looking perspective, emphasizing the importance of innovation and continuous
improvement. This term implies that the identified practices are not static, but rather are constantly
evolving, and that organizations need to keep abreast of new developments to maintain their
effectiveness.
48. The second article of this section, Article 7 (Cryptographic key management), further requires
financial entities to establish and document a cryptographic key management policy as an integral
part of the overall encryption policy. The cryptographic key management policy should establish
guidelines for the correct use, protection, and lifecycle management of cryptographic keys,
ensuring their secure generation, storage, distribution, and disposal.
49. When selecting cryptographic technologies and usage practices, financial entities should consider
leading practices, reliable techniques, and the classification of involved ICT assets. If they cannot
adhere to leading practices or use the most reliable techniques, financial entities should implement
15
and keep records of mitigation and monitoring measures to maintain resilience against cyber
threats.
50. Monitoring developments in cryptanalysis is crucial, and financial entities must update or change
their cryptographic technology when necessary to remain resilient. If updating or changing
cryptographic technology is not feasible, alternative mitigation and monitoring measures should be
adopted.
Q7. Do you agree with the suggested approach on encryption and cryptography? If not, please
explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q8. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in
addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
2.4.1.5 Section V: ICT operations security
51. ICT operations security is vital for financial entities to ensure the secure and reliable operation of
their ICT systems and services. By developing and documenting ICT operating procedures, financial
entities can effectively manage their ICT assets and mitigate the risk of unauthorized access,
intrusions, and data misuse.
52. This section contains five articles on (i) ICT operating procedures, (ii) capacity and performance
management, (iii) vulnerability and patch management, (iv) data and system security and (v)
logging.
53. ICT operating procedures shall cover key elements such as installation, maintenance, configuration,
and deinstallation of ICT assets, as well as controls and monitoring of ICT systems, error handling,
and recovery procedures. ICT operating procedures help maintain the availability, authenticity,
integrity, and confidentiality of data, while also addressing legacy systems and interdependencies
among ICT systems. By adhering to these procedures, financial entities can minimize disruptions to
business operations, detect and respond to security incidents promptly, and ensure the continuity
and security of their services.
54. In order to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of data, mitigate ICT
risk, and ensure the security and integrity of network, financial entities should develop, document
and implement procedures on the capacity and performance management, as well as vulnerability
and patch management.
55. In terms of capacity and performance management, financial entities need to identify the capacity
requirements of their ICT systems and implement resource optimization and monitoring
procedures. The aim is to maintain and enhance the availability and efficiency of ICT systems while
preventing capacity shortages. Specific attention should be given to systems with long or complex
procurement processes or those that are resource intensive.
16
56. Regarding vulnerability and patch management, financial entities must establish procedures to
detect vulnerabilities and update relevant information resources accordingly. Regular automated
vulnerability scanning and assessments, typically using specialized software tools, of ICT assets are
required, especially for critical or important functions. Also, ICT third-party service providers should
handle any vulnerabilities and report them to the financial entities. The tracking of ICT third-party
libraries (including tracking patches and updates), disclosure of vulnerability-related information,
and deployment of patches are also vital. Financial entities need to prioritize patch deployment
based on vulnerability criticality and risk profiles, while monitoring and verifying remediation.
57. Regarding the automated vulnerability scans, and considering that the main purpose of these scans
is to cover the widest range possible of assets in an automated way, ESAs are considering mandating
these requirement for all ICT assets, with independence of their classification and overall risk
profile, and with the same weekly frequency already included for those ICT assets supporting critical
or important functions.
58. Additionally, financial entities should record detected vulnerabilities, evaluate software and
hardware patches and updates, test and deploy them in a controlled environment, and establish
emergency procedures and deadlines for installation.
59. Another important aspect to ensure the security of networks against intrusions and data misuse,
and to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data is the data and
system security. To this end, financial entities should implement various security measures outlined
in Article 15 of DORA.
60. Finally, developing and implementing logging procedures, protocols, and tools allow financial
entities to secure networks, preserve data integrity, and detect anomalies. By identifying events to
be logged, setting retention periods, and securing log data, entities can effectively monitor and
investigate ICT security incidents. The level of detail in logs should align with their purpose and the
usage of the ICT asset producing the log, facilitating accurate analysis.
61. Logging events related to access control, capacity management, change management, and network
traffic activities enhances monitoring capabilities. Protecting logging systems and information from
tampering ensures data integrity, while clock synchronization aids incident response and forensic
analysis. These measures collectively strengthen the security posture of financial entities.
62. Regarding cloud computing resources, ESAs may consider introducing additional requirements to
those already included in Article 11(2) point (k). For example, preventive and detective measures
to ensure the security in the cloud environment, including tenant security and further resilience
model.
Q9. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT operations security? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestion.
Q10. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the
RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
17
Q11. What would be the impact on the financial entities to implement weekly automated
vulnerability scans for all ICT assets, without considering their classification and overall risk
profile? Please provide details and if possible, quantitative data.
Q12. Do you agree with the requirements already identified for cloud computing
resources? Is there any additional measure or control that should be considered specifically
for cloud computing resources in the RTS, beyond those already identified in Article 11(2)
point (k)? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
2.4.1.6 Section VI: Network security
63. Network security measures are vital for the financial entities overall digital and operational
resilience as they establish policies, procedures, protocols, and tools to protect networks, prevent
unauthorized access, maintain data confidentiality, integrity, and availability, and ensure secure
data transfer. They help financial entities mitigate risks, detect vulnerabilities, and establish a
secure network infrastructure that aligns with industry standards and leading practices. This section
is split in two articles covering two types of network security measures: network security
management and securing information in transit.
64. In terms of network security management, financial entities are required to develop policies,
procedures, protocols, and tools to ensure the security of networks. This includes segregation and
segmentation of ICT systems and networks based on their criticality, classification, and risk profile.
The mapping and visualization of networks provide an overview for effective management. A
separate and dedicated network for ICT asset administration, along with strict prohibition of direct
internet access, helps mitigate unauthorized access risks. Implementing network access controls
prevents connection of unauthorized devices or systems. Encryption of network connections across
various networks ensures the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of communication.
65. Designing networks in accordance with security requirements and industry leading practices
protects the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the network. Securing network traffic
between internal networks and external connections safeguards against external threats. Regular
reviews of connection filters and network architecture help identify potential vulnerabilities. Secure
configuration baselines, network hardening, and session termination after inactivity limit potential
attack vectors. Additionally, inclusion of ICT and information security measures in network service
agreements ensures that security requirements are met for both in-house and outsourced services.
66. Regarding securing information in transit, financial entities must develop policies, procedures,
protocols, and tools to protect data transfer. This includes ensuring the availability, authenticity,
integrity, and confidentiality of data during network transmission. Measures to prevent data
leakage and secure information transfer with external parties are also essential. Confidentiality and
non-disclosure arrangements, along with compliance assessments, protect sensitive information.
Financial entities should also comply with data protection laws is required for the transfer of
personal data.
18
Q13. Do you agree with the suggested approach on network security? If not, please
explain and provide alternative suggestions.
Q14. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the
RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
2.4.1.7 Section VII: ICT project and change management
67. Often, poor ICT project management significantly impacts the achievement of business objectives
especially in terms of cost, quality and time in all sizes of firms. Similarly, the lack of proper
management of projects and other changes in the ICT domain can be seen as a common source of
ICT related incidents.
68. Having an appropriate ICT project and change management framework in place therefore serves
two purposes, it helps to maximise the benefits associated with projects, acquisitions and changes
and on the other hand it reduces or minimises the negative impacts that can result from such
actions.
69. Section VII elaborates on these aspects through three articles. The first one focuses on the
relevance of having a project management policy as a basic mechanism for ensuring the security of
networks, against intrusions and data misuse and, in order to preserve the availability, authenticity,
integrity and confidentiality of data. This article is based on the EBA Guidelines on ICT and security
risk management, in particular Section 3.6.1, notably with regard to the elements to be included in
the policy.
70. The second article, with the same objectives, establishes the need for a policy regarding ICT systems
acquisition, development, and maintenance, focused fundamentally on the testing of these systems
and on the security implications that can be derived from these processes.
71. Finally, the third article in this section focuses on procedures related to change management. It has
been decided to include change management in the same section as project management, although
under certain approaches it can be considered as another element of the ICT operational
management area. In any case, regardless of which heading it falls under, proper change
management has a similar impact to proper project management, and poor change management
is often behind incidents in the ICT field. Once again, the focus is on resilience, and in this line,
requirements are established on the testing and approval of changes, on the governance of such
changes and on the procedures for making urgent changes or reversing changes made if necessary.
72. These two latter articles both include specific provisions for CCPs and CSDs, replicating the existing
EMIR and CSDR L2 provisions requiring them to test their ICT systems (i) prior to their use and (ii)
after significant changes1, to include the minimal list of external stakeholders that CCPs and CSDs
should involve in such tests.
1 respectively, Articles 9(2) of EMIR RTS 2013/153 and Article 75(6) of CSDR RTS 2017/392.
19
Q15. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT project and change management?
If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
Q16. Do you consider that specific elements regarding supply-chain risk should be taken
into consideration in the RTS? If yes, please explain and provide suggestions.
Q17. Do you agree with the specific approach proposed for CCPs and CSDs? If not, please
explain and provide alternative suggestion.
2.4.1.8 Section VIII: Physical and environmental security
73. Section VIII is focused on covering the requirements related to physical and environmental security
as a fundamental part of the ICT risk management framework. Both physical and environmental
security are key aspects in the process of ensuring the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data and ICT systems.
74. A single article establishes the implementation of a policy in this area, aimed at specifying the
elements of this policy with respect to Secure premises, data centres, sensitive designated areas
and hardware equipment.
75. The main elements of this policy include measures such as the protection of these ICT assets against
unauthorised access, attacks, accidents and from environmental threats and hazards, and the
proper maintenance of these assets. It also establishes the need for a clear desk policy for papers
and a clear screen policy for information processing facilities.
Q18. Do you agree with the suggested approach on physical and environmental security?
If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
Q19. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the
RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
2.4.1.9 Section IX: ICT and information security awareness and training
76. This section focuses on elaborating on the requirements related to the ICT security awareness
programmes and digital operational resilience training referred to in Article 13(6) of DORA. These
programmes are considered fundamental in order to preserve the availability, authenticity,
integrity and confidentiality of data.
77. Thus, requirements are established with respect to elements to be included, the periodicity of such
programmes, their review and effectiveness.
Q20. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT and information security
awareness and training? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
2.4.2 Chapter II: Human resources policy and access control
78. This chapter is intended to cover the mandate set out under Article 15(b) of DORA: “develop further
components of the controls of access management rights referred to in Article 9(4), point (c) [of
20
DORA] and associated human resources policy (…)”. The chapter covers three firmly related but
distinct elements, human resources policy, identity management and access control.
79. DORA, primarily in its Article 9(4)(c), already sets out a requirement to “implement policies that
limit the physical or logical access to information assets and ICT assets to what is required for
legitimate and approved functions and activities only, and establish to that end a set of controls
that address access rights and ensure a sound administration thereof”.
80. Article 20 of the proposed draft RTS focuses, through a single article, on Human resources policy,
in particular on the main requirements related to the employment cycle. This article specifies
requirements on contracts, covering the pre-employment phase, on communication and
awareness, the employment period and on requirements to be considered after the termination of
the contractual relationship. In identifying these requirements, controls and measures identified in
the ISO/IEC 27001 and ISO/IEC 27002 standards have been considered.
81. Articles 21 and 22 introduce requirements relating to Identity and Access management.
82. Access controls, as part of the ICT risk management framework, help to protect unauthorised access
to information and systems, ensure the integrity of information and systems and preserve the
confidentiality of data, both internally and externally. The relevance of access control requirements
is therefore, for obvious reasons, particularly relevant in the financial sector.
83. Article 21 on Identity Management elaborates on the elements to be included by financial entities,
as part of their controls on access management rights, in the policies and procedures to ensure the
unique identification of natural persons and systems accessing the financial entities' information.
Provisions related to the management of user accounts and linked identities are also included.
84. Article 22 on Access Control sets out the main elements to be included in this policy, which address
the following topics: governance, authentication methods, strategy, access rights and physical
access.
Q21. Do you agree with the suggested approach on Chapter II - Human resources policy
and access control? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q22. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the
RTS in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
2.4.3 Chapter III: ICT-related incident detection and response
85. The management of ICT-related incidents is one of the core elements of DORA. Numerous articles
of DORA elaborate on specific aspects linked to ICT-related incidents, such as incident detection
(Article 10), incident response (Article 11) or the learning process linked to incidents (Article 13) as
well as the whole chapter III of DORA which covers aspects related to ICT-related incident
management, classification and reporting.
21
86. The mandate set out in Article 15(c) of DORA is intended to complement the requirements already
included in Level 1, by specifying further the steps that precede the application of Chapter III by
identifying the anomalous activities that can develop into ICT-related incidents. It requires to
develop further the mechanisms (specified in Article 10(1) of DORA) enabling a prompt detection
of anomalous activities and the criteria (set out in Article 10(2) of DORA) triggering ICT-related
incident detection and response processes.
87. The latter part of the mandate is covered in Article 23 of the proposed draft RTS (ICT-related
incident management policy). It includes the requirement to document the ICT-related incident
management process referred to in Article 17 of DORA and complements the elements to be
included in this process. Further, other elements considered key to help in fulfilling this objective
are added, such as the retention of evidence related to ICT-related incidents and the review of the
policy.
88. The former part of the mandate is covered under Article 24 of the proposed RTS (Anomalous
activities detection and criteria for ICT-related incidents detection and response), which provides for
more granular requirements for the mechanisms to be established by financial entities to allow the
correct detection of anomalous activities that can result in ICT network performance issues and ICT-
related incidents and on establishes criteria for the activation of the processes linked to the ICT-
related incident detection and subsequent response.
Q23. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT-related incidents detection
and response, in particular with respect to the criteria to trigger ICT-related incident
detection and response process referred to in Article 24(5) of the proposed RTS? If not,
please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
2.4.4 Chapter IV: ICT business continuity management
89. ICT systems and services have become essential to the operation of the financial sector, and any
disruption to such systems or services can result in a significant impact on business continuity and
the provision of critical services to customers and stakeholders.
90. Article 11 of DORA already emphasises the need to ensure adequate response and recovery of ICT
systems, requiring the implementation of a business continuity policy and response and recovery
plans, as well as adequate testing of these plans.
91. The mandate set out in Article 15, points (d), (e) and (f) of DORA is aimed to elaborate further on
these three elements and has been covered through three articles.
92. Article 25 of the proposed draft RTS details the expected components of the ICT business continuity
policy. DORA establishes through its Article 11(1) the obligation to implement, as part of the ICT
risk management framework, a comprehensive ICT business continuity policy, which may be
adopted as a dedicated specific policy, forming an integral part of the overall business continuity
policy of the financial entity. The proposed article elaborates on the main objectives and
22
characteristics of this policy and further specifies the minimum elements to be included in the
business continuity policy as well as the requirements related to its communication (to be aligned
with the relevant requirements already set out in Articles 11 and 14 of DORA).
93. In addition, this article also includes specific provisions for CCPs, CSDs and trading venues,
replicating certain requirements from EMIR, CSDR and MIFID 2 Level 2 regulations2 in place, in
particular the maximum two-hour time-recovery objective for their critical functions, the need to
consider links and interdependencies with external stakeholders when defining it and, for CCPs, the
establishment and maintenance of a secondary site.
94. Article 11(4) of DORA establishes the need to maintain and periodically test ICT business continuity
plans, notably with regard to critical or important functions outsourced or contracted through
arrangements with ICT third-party service providers. DORA also elaborates on the obligation to
conduct a business impact analysis (BIA) and the periodicity of the testing of the plans. Article 26 of
the proposed RTS further elaborates on the assumptions to be taken into account, the main
elements to be considered in relation to the planning and execution of such tests, as well as the
scenarios to be considered and the objectives that testing should help to achieve. For the
elaboration of this article the EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk management (in particular its
section 3.7.4) has been largely used.
95. Here also specific provisions have been included to replicate the requirements existing for CCPs and
CSDs under EMIR and CSDR L2 regulations3 to make sure certain selected external stakeholders are
involved in this testing.
96. As a fundamental part of the ICT response and recovery mechanisms, financial entities shall
implement ICT response and recovery plans in line with the provisions of Article 11 (3) of DORA.
Article 27 of the proposed draft RTS further specifies the components of these ICT response and
recovery plans. It elaborates on the minimum elements to be considered for the development of
the plans and the scenarios to be considered, which include additional scenarios to those already
contemplated in Article 11(6), second subparagraph, and Article 15(e) of DORA.
Q24. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT business continuity management?
If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q25. Do you agree with the suggested specific approach for CCPs, CSDs and trading
venues? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
2.4.5 Chapter V: Report on the ICT risk management framework review
97. Article 6(5) of DORA establishes the obligation to document and review the ICT risk management
framework. This article also establishes proportionality mechanisms, limiting the minimum
periodicity for such a review for micro-enterprises. The review should ensure continuous
2 Cf. Article 17(3) of EMIR RTS 2013/153, Article 78(2) of CSDR RTS 2017/392 and Article 15(2) of MIFID2 RTS 2017/584.
3 Cf. Article 20(2)(b) of EMIR RTS 2013/153 and Article 79(c) of CSDR RTS 2017/392.
23
improvement of the ICT risk management framework. As part of the review process, a report on
the outcome of the review shall also be generated, which should be sent to the competent authority
upon request. The format and content of such a report is the subject of this chapter, which
addresses the mandate set out in Article 15(g) of DORA.
98. Such a report should assist, internally, in the proper documentation and implementation of
modifications or revisions made and should serve as a basis for a periodic and ongoing review of
the ICT risk management framework. As the report should also be submitted, upon request, to the
relevant competent authority, it is also important to harmonise the format and content of the
document, so that the different stakeholders, both internal and external, are aware of the minimum
elements to be included and can access it in an appropriate manner.
99. Both elements, the format and the content, are covered in a unique article. In terms of format
requirements, paragraph 1 of this article only requires the report to be in a searchable electronic
format. The ESAs believe that whatever format is chosen, it must guarantee the basic aspects of
any information flow, but that no unique format for the file that contains it should be mandated,
to leave some flexibility to the financial entities.
100. Paragraph 2 of the article elaborates on the content that is expected from such report and
cover the minimum elements that shall be included in it. It is not intended to be an exhaustive list
for the final report and entities may, as long as they include the information contained in the article,
include in the report other elements that they consider useful.
Q26. Do you agree with the suggested approach on the format and content of the report
on the ICT risk management framework review? If not, please explain and provide
alternative suggestion.
2.5 Title II: Simplified ICT risk management framework
Article 16(3) of DORA
The ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, in consultation with the ENISA, develop common draft
regulatory technical standards in order to:
(a) specify further the elements to be included in the ICT risk management framework referred to
in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, point (a);
(b) specify further the elements in relation to systems, protocols and tools to minimise the impact
of ICT risk referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, point (c), with a view to ensuring
the security of networks, enabling adequate safeguards against intrusions and data misuse and
preserving the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data;
(c) specify further the components of the ICT business continuity plans referred to in paragraph 1,
second subparagraph, point (f);
(d) specify further the rules on the testing of business continuity plans and ensure the effectiveness
of the controls referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, point (g) and ensure that such
24
testing duly takes into account scenarios in which the quality of the provision of a critical or
important function deteriorates to an unacceptable level or fails;
(e) specify further the content and format of the report on the review of the ICT risk management
framework referred to in paragraph 2.
When developing those draft regulatory technical standards, the ESAs shall take into account the
size and the overall risk profile of the financial entity, and the nature, scale and complexity of its
services, activities and operations.
101. Financial entities covered by Article 16 of DORA are: small and non-interconnected firms,
payment institutions exempted pursuant to Directive (EU)2015/2366, institutions exempted
pursuant to Directive 2013/36/EU in respect of which Member States have decided not to apply
the option referred to in Article 2(4) of this Regulation, electronic money institutions exempted
pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC and small institutions for occupational retirement provision.
Recital 42 explains the reasons why these categories of entities benefit from lighter ICT risk
management requirements. The ESAs understand that in principle, these entities usually are small
or very small firms, and when they have, sometimes counting only a handful of employees.
102. To specify the requirements that should apply to these financial entities, the ESAs have
considered two sets of provisions in DORA:
a. On the one hand, Article 16(1), first subparagraph of DORA which lists requirements
that shall not apply to the financial entities subject to the simplified ICT risk
management framework, Articles 5 to 15 of DORA, i.e. the ‘general’ ICT risk
management requirements, as well as Recital 43 of DORA, which details these
excluded requirements; and
b. On the other hand, Article 16(1), second subparagraph and Article 16(2) of DORA,
which set out a list of ‘positive’ obligations applicable to those entities.
103. This mandate is covered under the second title of the proposed draft RTS and is divided into 4
chapters: ICT risk management framework, further elements of systems, protocols, and tools to
minimise the impact of ICT risk, ICT business continuity management and report on the ICT risk
management framework review.
104. This title has been designed in accordance with the principle of proportionality already
embedded in Article 16 of DORA, meaning that it is tailored to fit the specific needs and
characteristics of these entities. The objective is to strike a balance between ensuring the security
of their ICT systems and that of other financial entities, while avoiding excessive regulatory burdens.
25
Title II Article 16 (3)
Simplified ICT Risk management framework
Chapter I Chapter II Chapter III Chapter IV
FURTHER ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS,
ICT RISK MANAGEMENT ICT BUSINESS CONTINUITY REPORT ON THE REVIEW OF THE
PROTOCOLS, AND TOOLS TO
FRAMEWORK MANAGEMENT ICT RMF
MINIMISE THE IMPACT OF ICT RISK
105. Below is presented the suggested approach for each of these chapters.
2.5.1 Chapter I – Simplified ICT risk management framework
106. The purpose of this chapter is to cover the mandate established in Article 16(3)(a) of DORA,
which requires specifying further the elements to be included in the ICT risk management
framework referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, point (a) of the same article. To
maintain a high level of digital operational resilience and considering sector-specific Union law,
some financial entities are subject to lighter requirements or exemptions for reasons associated
with their size and the nature, scale and complexity of the services, activities and operations they
provide. These financial entities mentioned in Article 16 of DORA are required to establish and
maintain a simplified ICT risk management framework. This framework serves as a comprehensive
set of requirements that outlines the necessary mechanisms and measures to effectively manage
ICT risk, while also safeguarding the physical components and infrastructures involved.
107. To achieve this, the ESAs believe the framework should encompass various key elements.
Firstly, governance and organization provide the foundation for effective ICT risk management by
establishing clear roles, responsibilities, and accountability within the organization. This ensures
that decision-making processes are defined and that risk management is embedded throughout the
entity.
108. Note that the reference in the proposed provisions to ‘management body’ is not an issue given
the broad definition given to that concept in Article 2(30) of DORA, which includes management
bodies as they are defined for financial entities in each sectorial legislation and also “the equivalent
persons who effectively run the entity or have key functions in accordance with relevant Union or
national law”, which should cater for the situation of the smallest entities.
109. The information security policy is a crucial component as it sets out the overall objectives,
principles, and guidelines for protecting the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality
of information. It outlines the entity's commitment to safeguarding its data and ICT assets, ensuring
compliance with relevant laws and regulations.
26
110. Classification of information assets and ICT assets allows financial entities to prioritize their
resources and efforts by categorizing and understanding the value, sensitivity, and criticality of their
information and technology. This classification enables the application of appropriate security
measures based on the risk profiles of different assets.
111. The ICT risk management process forms the core of the framework, involving the
identification, assessment, mitigation, and monitoring of ICT risk. It ensures that potential risks are
identified, analysed, and managed proactively to minimize their impact on operations
112. ICT-related incident management is essential for promptly responding to and recovering from
any ICT incidents or breaches that may occur. It establishes procedures and protocols to detect,
respond, and mitigate the effects of incidents, reducing potential damage and enhancing resilience.
113. Finally, physical and environmental security addresses the protection of physical components
and infrastructures supporting ICT systems. It includes measures to secure data centres, servers,
networks, and other critical assets from unauthorized access, theft, natural disasters, or
environmental hazards.
114. Including these elements within the simplified ICT risk management framework is crucial as
they provide a comprehensive and structured approach to managing ICT risk. They enable financial
entities to establish a robust governance framework, protect information assets, assess and
mitigate risks effectively, respond to incidents, and safeguard the physical environment supporting
ICT systems. By implementing these elements, financial entities can enhance their overall security
posture and ensure the continuity and reliability of their ICT operations.
Q27. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the simplified ICT risk
management framework? If not, please explain and provide alternative drafting as
necessary.
2.5.2 Chapter II – Further elements of systems, protocols, and tools to minimise the impact
of ICT risk
115. To mitigate the impact of ICT risk, financial entities referred to in Article 16 of DORA should
employ robust and up-to-date ICT systems, protocols, and tools that are specifically tailored to
support their operations and services. These measures are essential in ensuring the security of
networks, defending against intrusions, preventing data misuse, and maintaining the availability,
authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of critical data and cover different areas.
116. Access control is vital for financial entities to prevent unauthorized access to their ICT systems
and sensitive information. Financial entities should define and implement procedures for logical
and physical access control. These procedures should include granting access based on need-to-
know and least privileges, ensuring user accountability, managing account rights, using appropriate
authentication methods, and regularly reviewing access rights. By following these measures,
organizations can restrict access to authorized personnel, minimize unauthorized activities, and
27
protect data integrity, reducing the risk of breaches and unauthorized manipulation of systems and
information.
117. ICT operations security ensures the secure functioning of ICT systems throughout their
lifecycle. Financial entities should monitor and manage ICT assets supporting critical functions,
assess capacity requirements, perform vulnerability scanning, manage outdated assets, log events,
monitor logs for anomalies, stay informed about cyber threats, and implement measures to detect
security threats and vulnerabilities. These actions contribute to maintaining the availability,
reliability, and continuity of critical systems and services, protecting against unauthorized access,
information leakage, malicious code, and other security risks. In addition, considering that the
security level of the financial entity is as secure as its weakest point ESAs are considering mandating
these requirements for all ICT assets, and not only for those supporting critical or important
functions.
118. Ensuring the security of data, systems, and networks is crucial for safeguarding the integrity,
confidentiality, and availability of financial information. Financial entities should incorporate
various security measures to protect data at all stages, including in use, in transit, and at rest. This
involves implementing security measures for software, data storage media, systems, and endpoint
devices, as well as preventing and detecting unauthorized connections to networks. Measures are
also needed to ensure the secure transmission, deletion, and disposal of data, as well as to address
teleworking and cloud computing security. Compliance with data protection regulations and the
implementation of strong security measures are essential in maintaining a secure environment.
119. In addition to those requirements ESAs are considering introducing further bespoke
requirements for example, secure configuration baseline for ICT systems to minimise the exposure
to cyber risk and segregation and segmentation of ICT systems and networks taking into account
the criticality or importance of the function they support, the classification and overall risk profile
of ICT assets using them.
120. Financial entities should also prioritize ICT security testing to proactively identify vulnerabilities
and weaknesses within their systems. By conducting comprehensive assessments, penetration
testing, and vulnerability scans, they can uncover potential risks and promptly address them. This
includes establishing and implementing an ICT security testing plan that considers threats and
vulnerabilities specific to the financial entity. Reviews, assessments, and tests should align with the
overall risk profile of the entity, and the results should be carefully monitored and evaluated. Any
necessary updates to security measures should be implemented promptly, particularly for critical
ICT systems. This proactive approach is crucial for maintaining the resilience and security of ICT
systems.
121. Financial entities should adhere to secure practices in the acquisition, development, and
maintenance of ICT systems. A procedure should be implemented, following a risk-based approach,
which includes clearly defining functional and non-functional requirements, obtaining approval
28
from relevant business management, conducting testing and approval before first use, and
identifying measures to mitigate risks during development and implementation. By following these
practices, financial entities can mitigate potential vulnerabilities, ensuring the overall security and
reliability of ICT systems.
122. Finally, financial entities need robust ICT project and change management processes. They
should develop documented procedures covering project initiation to closure, defining roles and
responsibilities. Additionally, an ICT change management procedure ensures controlled recording,
testing, assessment, approval, implementation, and verification of system changes, preserving
digital operational resilience. Proper governance, risk assessment, and control mechanisms reduce
the likelihood of introducing vulnerabilities or disruptions, ensuring secure project implementation
and system modifications.
123. The requirements contained in the articles included in this chapter have been conveniently
adjusted taking into account the size and the overall risk profile of the financial entities subject to
the simplified regime, and the nature, scale and complexity of its services, activities and operations
compared to the analogous elements included in Title I, such is the case of the articles on Access
Control, ICT Operations Security, ICT systems acquisition, development, and maintenance. On the
other hand, certain related articles that were presented separately in Title I and with a greater
number of requirements, such as Project and change management or Data System and Network
Security, have been merged. Finally, requirements related to encryption and cryptography or
specific provisions related to human resources, among others, disappear.
124. Regarding cloud computing resources, ESAs may consider introducing additional requirements
to those already included in Article 37(2)(h). For example, preventive and detective measures to
ensure the security in the cloud environment, including tenant security and further resilience
model.
Q28. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the further elements of
systems, protocols, and tools to minimise the impact of ICT risk under the simplified ICT risk
management framework? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion as
necessary.
Q29. What would be the impact for financial entities to expand the ICT operation security
requirements for all ICT assets? Please provide details and if possible, quantitative data.
Q30. Are there any additional measures or control that should be considered specifically
for cloud resources in the draft RTS, beyond those already identified in Article 37(2)(h) of the
proposed draft RTS? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
2.5.3 Chapter III – ICT business continuity management
125. Financial entities referred to in Article 16 of DORA should also ensure the continuity of their
critical functions, especially in case of severe disruptions. By incorporating the components
identified under this chapter and conducting regular testing, financial entities enhance their
29
resilience and minimize disruption impacts. The ICT business continuity plans enable them to
safeguard critical operations, protect information assets, and ensure service continuity, even in
unforeseen circumstances.
126. The identified components should include conducting a business impact analysis (BIA) to
assess potential risks and vulnerabilities, identifying scenarios that ICT assets may face, and
developing plans based on the business impact analysis (BIA) and scenario assessment.
127. The ICT business continuity plans should be approved by the management body, documented
for easy access, and allocate sufficient resources for execution. They should establish recovery
levels and timeframes, specify activation triggers and actions, and outline restoration and recovery
measures. Backup policies, alternative options, communication arrangements, insurance
arrangements, and plan updates are also included.
128. Financial entities should also test their business continuity plans regularly to ensure their
effectiveness. Testing covers backup and restore procedures and occurs at least once a year or
during major plan changes. The tests should verify the ability to sustain operations until critical
functions are re-established and identify any deficiencies, which are documented, analysed,
addressed, and reported.
129. In this chapter, the complexity has been reduced compared to the Business Continuity articles
of Title I, among others, the scenarios to be considered or the requirements related to the testing
of the plans have been reduced. In general terms, the requirements related to business continuity
are maintained but with less granularity, since, for example, no specific requirements are
established with respect to Response and Recovery plans.
Q31. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT business continuity
management under the simplified ICT risk management framework? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
2.5.4 Chapter IV – Report on the ICT risk management framework review
130. Financial entities referred to in Article 16 of DORA should submit a report on the review of
their ICR risk management framework to the competent authority upon its request. This chapter
defines the format and content of the said report trying to strike a balance between the level of
details to be included in the report and the size or service provided by these entities. It notably
requires financial entities to provide less details on the measures taken to address weaknesses,
planned developments, past reports and sources of information used to prepare this report than
under the general regime. Finally, as under the general regime, financial entities should send the
report in a searchable electronic format.
Q32. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the article on Format and
content of the report on the simplified ICT risk management review? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
30
31
4. Draft regulatory technical
standards
32
COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) …/…
of XXX
supplementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the
Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying further elements to be
included in ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools, developing further
components of the controls of access management rights, developing the mechanisms to
detect anomalous activities and the criteria triggering ICT-related incident detection
and response processes, specifying further the components of the ICT business
continuity policy, the testing of ICT business continuity plans, the components of the
ICT response and recovery plans and the content and format of the report on the review
of the ICT risk management framework as well as specifying certain elements of the
simplified ICT risk management framework
(Text with EEA relevance)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending
Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014
and (EU) 2016/10114 and, in particular Articles 15, fourth subparagraph and 16(3), fourth
subparagraph thereof,
Whereas:
(1) Financial entities vary widely in their size, structure, and internal organisation and in the
nature and complexity of their activities. It is therefore necessary to take into account that
diversity while imposing certain fundamental regulatory requirements which are
appropriate for all financial entities under the scope of DORA when designing,
documenting and implementing the elements specified in this Regulation.
(2) To ensure the security of networks, enable adequate safeguards against intrusions and
data misuse, preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data,
including cryptographic techniques, and guarantee an accurate and prompt data
transmission without major disruptions and undue delays, financial entities should design,
document and implement ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools
containing elements on governance, ICT risk management process, ICT and information
asset management, cryptography, ICT operation security, network security, ICT system
acquisition, development and maintenance, physical and environmental security, ICT and
information security awareness and training. The abovementioned policies, procedures,
4 Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on digital operational
resilience for the financial sector and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU)
No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011 (OJ L 333, 27.12.2022, p. 1).
33
protocols and tools related to ICT security should be embedded in and be consistent with
the overall ICT risk management framework of the financial entity, which includes all the
further policies, procedures, strategies set out in Articles 6 to 14 of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554 and that are not within the scope of this Regulation.
(3) Considering leading practices and, where applicable, relevant international standards,
financial entities should develop and implement consistent and up-to-date ICT security
policies that support the financial entity’s digital operational resilience strategy and the
related information security objectives. To ensure compliance, enhance the overall
information security awareness and culture of the financial entity and prevent
unintentional security breaches, the ICT security policies should be approved by the
management body of the financial entity, and should be made available to all
stakeholders, including, where necessary, the one outside the financial entity such as ICT
third-party service providers.
(4) To ensure accountability, compliance and in order to improve the efficiency of the overall
ICT security of the financial entity, financial entities other than microenterprises should
specify in their ICT security policy specific tasks and responsibilities of their ICT risk
management function referred to in Article 6(4) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. The ICT
risk management function should be responsible to manage and monitor the ICT risk
management process and report on the outcome of the risk assessment to the management
body of the financial entity without undue delay. The ICT risk management function and
the management body should agree on the format of these reports ensuring that these are
clear and can be understood by the management body. The reports should also consider
the overall risk management framework of the financial entity. The ICT risk management
function should also identify document and review ICT securities policies, procedures,
protocols and tools to ensure they are up-to-date and adequate to achieve the ICT an
information security objective that the same function should define.
(5) To assess potential risks to their operations and take steps to mitigate or eliminate them
and to address ICT risk quickly, efficiently and comprehensively, and to ensure a high
level of digital operational resilience, financial entities should have an ICT risk
management process in place
(6) The provisions of this Regulation are linked to each other, since they relate to the area of
the ICT risk management framework, by detailing specific elements applicable to the
financial entities in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 or by
designing the simplified ICT risk management framework for the financial entities set out
in Article 16(1) of the same Regulation. To ensure coherence between those provisions,
which should enter into force at the same time, is appropriate to include all the regulatory
technical standards required by Article 15, fourth subparagraph, and Article 16(3), fourth
subparagraph, into a single Regulation.
(7) This Regulation is based on the draft regulatory technical standards submitted to the
Commission by the European Banking Authority, the European Insurance and
Occupational Pensions Authority and the European Securities and Markets Authority
(European Supervisory Authorities), in consultation with ENISA.
(8) The Joint Committee of the European Supervisory Authorities has conducted open public
consultations on the draft regulatory technical standards on which this Regulation is
34
based, analysed the potential related costs and benefits and requested the advice of the of
the Banking Stakeholder Group established in accordance with Article 37 of Regulation
(EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council5, the Insurance and
Reinsurance Stakeholder Group and the Occupational Pensions Stakeholder Group
established in accordance with Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the
European Parliament and of the Council6 and the Securities and Markets Stakeholder
Group established in accordance with Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the
European Parliament and of the Council7,
HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
5 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European
Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision
2009/78/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 12).
6 Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European
Supervisory Authority (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and
repealing Commission Decision 2009/79/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 48).
7 Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and
repealing Commission Decision 2009/77/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 84).
35
TITLE I - FURTHER HARMONISATION
OF ICT RISK MANAGEMENT TOOLS,
METHODS, PROCESSES AND POLICIES
CHAPTER I
ICT SECURITY POLICIES, PROCEDURES, PROTOCOLS, AND TOOLS
SECTION I
PROVISIONS ON GOVERNANCE
Article 1
General elements of ICT security
1. Financial entities shall ensure that their ICT policies including information security and
related procedures, protocols and tools are embedded in the ICT risk management framework.
Financial entities shall establish the ICT security policies, procedures, protocols and tools in
Chapter I with a view to ensuring the security of networks, enable adequate safeguards against
intrusions and data misuse, preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality
of data, including cryptographic techniques, and guarantee an accurate and prompt data
transmission without major disruptions and undue delays.
2. Financial entities shall ensure that the ICT security policies referred to in paragraph 1:
(a) are aligned to the financial entity’s information security objectives included in the
digital operational resilience strategy referred to in Article 6 (8) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554;
(b) contain the indication of the date of approval by the management body;
(c) include control measures to monitor their implementation and to record exceptions
in the implementation of the policies. In case of exceptions the digital operational resilience
of the financial entity shall be ensured;
(d) set out the responsibilities of staff at all levels to ensure the financial entity’s ICT
security;
(e) set out the consequences of non-compliance with the policies from staff of the
financial entity and ICT third-party service providers accessing the information assets and
ICT assets of the financial entity;
36
(f) list the documentation to be maintained;
(g) specify the segregation of duties arrangements to avoid conflicts of interest, in the
context of the three lines of defence model or other internal risk management and control
model, as applicable;
(h) consider leading practices and, where applicable, relevant international standards;
(i) identify the roles and responsibilities for their development, implementation and
maintenance;
(j) are reviewed in accordance with the requirements set out in in Article 6(5) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and take into account material changes concerning the financial
entity, including material changes to activities or processes of the financial entity, or to the
cyber threat landscape or to applicable legal obligations.
Article 2
Provisions on governance
1. As part of their ICT security policies, financial entities other than microenterprises shall
assign to the control function referred to in Article 6(4) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 all of
the following tasks and responsibilities:
(a) reporting to and advising the management body, to which the control function shall
be accountable, including reporting of the outcome of the risk assessment required by
Article 3(1), point (b);
(b) managing and monitoring the financial entity’s ICT risk in accordance with
requirements laid down in Section II of this regulation and Chapter II of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554;
(c) defining the ICT and information security objectives and setting the qualitative and
quantitative measures of their attainment, key performance indicators and key risk metrics
referred to in Article 6(8), point (c) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
(d) remaining independent from the function or functions in charge of the ICT
development, management, changes and operations;
(e) monitoring the accuracy of classification of information assets and ICT assets
referred to in Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
(f) developing and monitoring the effective implementation of ICT security awareness
programmes and digital operational resilience training referred to in Article 13(6) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
37
SECTION II
Article 3
ICT risk management
1. Financial entities shall develop, document and implement ICT risk management policy
and procedures with a view to ensuring the security of networks, enable adequate safeguards
against intrusions and data misuse, preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, including cryptographic techniques, and guarantee an accurate and
prompt data transmission without major disruptions and undue delay. The ICT risk management
policy and procedures shall include all of the following:
(a) the indication of the approved risk tolerance levels for ICT risk established according
to Article 6(8), point (b) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
(b) the procedure and the methodology to conduct the ICT risk assessment, identifying
vulnerabilities and threats that affect or may affect the supported business functions, the
ICT systems and ICT assets supporting those functions and the quantitative or qualitative
indicators to measure impact and likelihood of occurrence of those vulnerabilities and
threats;
(c) the procedure to identify, implement and document ICT risk treatment measures for
the ICT risk assessed, including the determination of ICT risk treatment measures necessary
to bring ICT risk within the risk tolerance levels of ICT risk of the financial entity. The
procedure shall ensure the monitoring of the effectiveness of the measures implemented, the
assessment of whether the established risk tolerance levels of the financial entity have been
attained and that actions are taken to correct or improve the measures where necessary;
(d) with reference to the ICT risk that are still present following the implementation of
the ICT risk treatment measures:
i. the identification of residual ICT risk. The residual ICT risk shall be integrated into
the overall risk management process;
ii. the assignment of roles and responsibilities regarding the acceptance of the residual
ICT risk that exceed the financial entity’s risk tolerance levels for ICT risk established
according to Article 6(8), point (b) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and for the review
process referred to in point (iii);
iii. the development of an inventory of the accepted residual ICT risk, including an
explanation of the reasons for which they were accepted;
iv. provisions on the review of the accepted residual ICT risk at least once a year,
including the identification of any changes to the residual ICT risk, the assessment of
38
available mitigation measures and the assessment of whether the reasons justifying
the acceptance of residual ICT risk are still valid and applicable.
(e) provisions on the monitoring of any changes to their ICT landscape, internal and
external vulnerabilities and threats and of ICT risk to promptly detect changes that could
affect the overall ICT risk profile. Financial entities shall verify at least once a year that
changes to their business strategy and the digital operational resilience strategy, if any, are
taken into account in the overall ICT risk profile.
3. Financial entities shall update the ICT risk management policies and procedures where
material changes to the cyber threat landscape, to ICT services, or to ICT assets supporting the
business functions occur.
SECTION III
ICT ASSET MANAGEMENT
Article 4
ICT asset management policy
1. As part of the ICT security policies, financial entities shall develop, document and
implement a policy on management of ICT assets, with a view to preserving the availability,
authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data.
2. The policy on management of ICT assets shall:
(a) prescribe the monitoring and management of the life cycle of ICT assets identified
and classified as required by Article 8(6) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, including
exceptions, to ensure that they meet and support business and risk management
requirements;
(b) prescribe that the financial entity keeps records of all of the following:
i. unique identifier of each ICT asset;
ii. information on the location, either physical or logical, of all ICT assets;
iii. the classification of ICT assets, as specified in Article 8 of Regulation (EU)
2022/2254;
iv. the identity of ICT asset owner;
v. apart from microenterprises, the information needed to perform specific ICT risk
assessment on all legacy ICT systems;
vi. business functions or services supported by the ICT asset;
39
vii. the ICT business continuity requirements, including recovery time objectives and
recovery points objectives
viii. whether the ICT asset can be or is exposed to external networks, including the
internet;
ix. the links and interdependencies among ICT assets and the business functions using
each ICT asset.
Article 5
ICT asset management procedure
1. Financial entities shall develop, document and implement an ICT asset management
procedure, with a view to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of
data.
2. Such procedure shall detail the criteria to perform the criticality assessment of
information assets and ICT assets supporting business functions. The assessment shall take into
account the ICT risk related to those business functions and their dependencies on the
information assets or ICT assets and how the loss of confidentiality, integrity, availability of
such information assets and ICT assets would impact their business processes and activities.
SECTION IV
ENCRYPTION AND CRYPTOGRAPHY
Article 6
Encryption and cryptographic controls
1. As part of their ICT security policies, financial entities shall develop, document and
implement a policy on encryption and cryptographic controls, with a view to preserve the
availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of data.
2. The policy on encryption and cryptographic controls shall include all the following
elements:
(a) rules for the encryption of data at rest, in transit and, where relevant, in use, taking
into account the results of the approved data classification and ICT risk assessment
processes to protect the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data. If
encryption of data in use is not possible, financial entities shall process data in use in a
separated and protected environment to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability
of data.
40
(b) rules for the encryption of internal network connections and traffic with external
parties, which shall protect availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data,
taking into account the criticality and the approved data classification and ICT risk
assessment processes.
(c) a cryptographic key management policy establishing the correct use, protection and
lifecycle of cryptographic keys, in accordance with Article 7;
3. Financial entities shall include in the policy on encryption and cryptographic controls
criteria to select cryptographic techniques and use practices taking into account leading
practices, appropriate techniques referred to in international standards and the classification of
ICT assets involved established according to Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. Where
the financial entity cannot adhere to the leading practices or use the most reliable techniques, it
shall adopt mitigation and monitoring measures to ensure resiliency against cyber threats.
4. Financial entities shall include in the policy on encryption and cryptographic controls
provisions to monitor developments in cryptanalysis and, where necessary, update or change
the cryptographic technology to ensure they remain resilient against cyber threats. Where the
financial entity cannot update or change the cryptographic technology, it shall adopt mitigation
and monitoring measures to ensure they remain resilient against cyber threats.
5. Financial entities shall include in the policy on encryption and cryptographic controls
the requirement to record the adoption of mitigation and monitoring measures adopted in
accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 and the reasons for doing so.
Article 7
Cryptographic key management
1. Financial entities shall lay out in the cryptographic key management policy referred to
in Article 6(2), point (d) the requirements for managing cryptographic keys through their whole
lifecycle, including generating, storing, backing up, archiving, retrieving, transmission, retiring,
revoking and destroying keys.
2. Financial entities shall identify and implement controls to protect cryptographic keys
through their whole lifecycle against loss, unauthorised access, disclosure and modification.
The controls shall be designed taking into account the results of the approved data classification
and the ICT risk assessment processes.
3. Financial entities shall develop and implement methods to recover the cryptographic
keys in the case of lost, compromised or damaged keys.
4. Financial entities shall create and maintain a register for all certificates and certificate
storing devices. The register shall be kept up-to date.
41
SECTION V
ICT OPERATIONS SECURITY
Article 8
ICT operating policies and procedures
1. As part of the ICT security policies and procedures, financial entities shall develop,
document and implement ICT operating policies and procedures to manage the operations of
ICT assets, with a view to ensuring the security of networks, against intrusions and data misuse
and preserving the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data. These
procedures shall define how financial entities operate, monitor, control and restore their ICT
assets, including the documentation of ICT operations.
2. The ICT operating policies and procedures referred to in paragraph 1 shall cover all of
the following elements:
(a) ICT systems description, including all of the following:
i. secure installation, maintenance, configuration and deinstallation of ICT assets;
ii. management of information assets used by ICT assets, including their processing and
handling, automated and manual;
iii. identification and control of legacy ICT systems.
(b) Controls and monitoring of ICT systems, including all of the following:
i. backup and restore requirements of ICT systems;
ii. scheduling requirements, taking into consideration interdependencies among the ICT
systems;
iii. protocols for audit-trail and system log information;
iv. requirements to ensure that the performance of internal audit and other testing
minimises disruptions to business operations.
v. requirements on the segregation of ICT production environments from development,
testing and other non-production environments. The segregation shall consider all the
components of an environment, such as accounts, data or connections, in accordance
with Article 13(1) point (a);
(c) Error handling concerning ICT systems, including all of the following:
i. guidelines for handling errors;
ii. support and escalation contacts, including external support contacts in case of
unexpected operational or technical issues;
42
iii. ICT system restart, rollback and recovery procedures for use in the event of ICT
system disruption.
Article 9
Capacity and performance management
1. As part of the ICT security procedures financial entities shall develop, document and
implement capacity and performance management procedures to identify capacity requirements
of their ICT systems and apply resource optimisation and monitoring procedures to maintain
and improve availability and efficiency of ICT systems and prevent ICT capacity shortages
before they materialise.
2. The capacity and performance management procedures shall ensure that appropriate
measures are taken to cater for the specificities of ICT systems with long or complex
procurement or approval processes or that are resource-intensive.
Article 10
Vulnerability and patch management
1. As part of the ICT security procedures, financial entities shall develop, document and
implement vulnerability management procedures, with a view to ensuring the security of
networks, against intrusions and data misuse, in order to preserve the availability, authenticity,
integrity and confidentiality of data.
2. These procedures shall:
(a) identify and update relevant and trustworthy information resources to build and
maintain awareness about vulnerabilities;
(b) ensure the performance of automated vulnerability scanning and assessments on ICT
assets commensurate to their classification and overall risk profile of the ICT asset. For
those supporting critical or important functions it shall be performed at least on a weekly
basis.
(c) ensure that ICT third-party service providers handle any vulnerabilities related to the
ICT services provided to the financial entity and report them to the financial entity. In
particular, financial entities shall request that ICT third-party service providers investigate
the relevant vulnerabilities, determine the root cause and implement appropriate solutions;
(d) track the usage of third-party libraries, including open source, monitoring the version
and possible updates;
(e) establish procedures for responsible disclosure of vulnerabilities to clients and
counterparts as well as to the public, as appropriate;
43
(f) deploy patches to address identified vulnerabilities. If no patches are available for a
vulnerability, financial entities shall identify and implement other mitigation measures;
(g) prioritise the deployment of patches and of the other mitigation measures, where
applicable pursuant to point (f). For the purposes of the prioritisation, financial entities shall
consider the criticality of the vulnerability, the classification and risk profile of the ICT
assets affected by the identified vulnerabilities;
(h) monitor and verify the remediation of vulnerabilities;
(i) prescribe the recording of any detected vulnerabilities affecting ICT systems and the
monitoring of their resolution.
3. As part of the ICT security procedures, financial entities shall develop, document and
implement patch management procedures, with a view to ensuring the security of networks,
against intrusions and data misuse, in order to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity
and confidentiality of data.
4. These procedures shall:
(a) identify and evaluate available software and hardware patches and updates using
automated tools, to the extent possible.;
(b) identify emergency procedures for the patching and updating of ICT assets;
(c) test and deploy software and hardware patch and updates in an environment, which
replicates the production one, to avoid adverse consequences and disruption before their
deployment to production environments;
(d) set deadlines for the installation of software and hardware patches and updates and
escalation procedures if case the deadline cannot be met.
Article 11
Data and system security
1. As part of the ICT security procedures, with a view to ensuring the security of networks
and information systems, against intrusions and data misuse, in order to preserve the
availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data, financial entities shall develop,
document and implement a data and system security procedure.
2. The data and system security procedure shall include all of the following elements
related to data and ICT system security, in accordance with the classification performed
pursuant to Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554:
(a) the access restrictions, in line with Chapter II Section II of this Regulation,
supporting the protection requirements for each level of classification;
44
(b) identification of secure configuration baseline for ICT assets taking into account
leading practices, appropriate techniques referred to in international standards that will
minimise their exposure to cyber threats, and measures to verify regularly that these
baselines are those that are effectively deployed;
(c) identification of security measures so that only authorised software is installed in
ICT systems and end point devices;
(d) identification of security measures against malicious code;
(e) identification of security measures to ensure the use of only authorised data storage
media, systems and endpoint devices to transfer and store data of the financial entity;
(f) requirements to secure the use of portable endpoint devices and private non-portable
endpoint devices as follows:
i. the use of a centralised management solution to remotely manage the endpoint
devices and remotely wipe the financial entity’s data;
ii. the use of security mechanisms that cannot be modified, removed or bypassed by staff
members or ICT third-party service providers;
iii. the authorisation to use removable data storage devices only where the residual ICT
risk remains within the financial entity’s risk tolerance levels;
(g) the process to securely delete data on-premises or stored externally that the financial
entity no longer needs to collect or to store;
(h) the process to securely dispose or decommission of data storage devices on premises
or stored externally containing confidential information;
(i) the identification and implementation of security measures to prevent data loss and
leakage for systems and endpoint devices;
(j) the implementation of security measures to ensure that teleworking and the use of
private endpoint devices does not adversely impact the ICT security of the financial entity.
(k) for cloud computing resources:
i. the requirement that the individual in charge of using the cloud client interface to
manage the cloud computing resource shall have adequate competences and training
in the management and security of cloud computing resources that are specific to the
cloud service used;
ii. implement technical and organisational security measures on the credentials used to
access the cloud client interface to manage the cloud computing resource.
45
Article 12
Logging
1. As part of the safeguards against intrusions and data misuse and to preserve the
availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data, financial entities shall develop,
document and implement logging procedures, protocols and tools.
2. The logging procedures, protocols and tools shall include all the following:
(a) the identification of the events to be logged, the retention period of the logs and the
measures to secure and handle the log data, considering the purpose for which the logs are
created;
(b) Alignment of the level of detail of the logs with their purpose and usage to enable
effective detection of anomalous activities as specified under Article 24 of this Regulation
(c) the requirement to log events related to all of the following:
i. logical and physical access control and identity management;
ii. capacity management;
iii. change management;
iv. ICT operations, including ICT system activities;
v. network traffic activities, including ICT network performance;
(d) the indication of the retention period of the logs. The retention period shall be defined
taking into account the business and information security objectives, the reason for
recording the event in the logs and the results of the ICT risk assessment.
(e) measures to protect logging systems and log information against tampering, deletion,
and unauthorised access at rest, in transit, and, where relevant, in use;
(f) measures to detect failure of logging systems;
(g) the synchronisation of the clocks of all the financial entity’s ICT systems upon a
single reliable reference time source.
46
SECTION VI
NETWORK SECURITY
Article 13
Network security management
1. As part of the safeguards to ensuring the security of networks, against intrusions and
data misuse and, in order to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality
of data, financial entities shall develop, document and implement policies, procedures,
protocols and tools on network security management, including all of the following:
(a) segregation and segmentation of ICT systems and networks taking into account the
criticality or importance of the function they support, the classification and overall risk
profile of ICT assets using them;
(b) mapping and visual representation of all the financial entity’ networks and data
flows;
(c) use of a separate and dedicated network for the administration of ICT assets and
prohibition of direct internet access from and to devices or servers used for information
system administration;
(d) identification and implementation of network access controls to prevent and detect
connection to the financial entity's network by any unauthorised device or system, or any
endpoint not meeting financial entity's security requirements;
(e) encryption of network connections passing over corporate networks, public
networks, domestic networks, third party networks and wireless networks, for all
communication protocols used taking into account the results of the approved data
classification and the results of the ICT risk assessment and in accordance with the rules set
out in Article 6(2);
(f) design of networks in accordance with ICT security requirements and taking into
account leading practices to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the
network;
(g) securing the network traffic between the internal networks and the internet and other
external connections;
(h) identification of the roles and responsibilities for the definition, implementation,
approval, change and review of firewall rules and connections filters. Financial entities shall
perform the review on a regular basis according to the classification and overall risk profile
of ICT systems involved. For the ICT systems supporting critical or important functions,
the financial entities shall perform this review at least every six months;
47
(i) performance of reviews of the network architecture and of the network security
design once a year to identify potential vulnerabilities;
(j) measures to temporarily isolate, where necessary, subnetworks and network
components and devices;
(k) implementation of a secure configuration baseline of all network components and
hardening the network and network devices according to vendor instructions, industry
standards and leading practices;
(l) procedures to limit, lock, and terminate system and remote sessions after a
predefined period of inactivity;
(m) with reference to network services agreements, the identification and definition of
ICT and information security measures, service levels and management requirements of all
network services, whether these services are provided in-house or outsourced;
Article 14
Securing information in transit
1. As part of the safeguards to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, financial entities shall develop, document and implement the policies,
procedures, protocols and tools to protect information in transit. In particular, financial entities
shall ensure all of the following:
(a) the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data during network
transmission, as well as the establishment of procedures to assess compliance with these
requirements;
(b) the prevention and detection of data leakage and the secure transfer of information
between the financial entity and external parties;
(c) that requirements on confidentiality or non-disclosure arrangements reflecting the
financial entity’s needs for the protection of information are implemented, documented and
regularly reviewed, for both staff of the financial entity and of third parties, in line with the
requirements included under article 28 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
48
SECTION VII
ICT PROJECT AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT
Article 15
ICT project management
1. As part of the safeguards to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, financial entities shall develop, document and implement an ICT project
management policy.
2. The ICT project management policy shall define the elements to ensure effective
management of the ICT projects related to the acquisition, maintenance and, where applicable,
development of the financial entity’s ICT systems.
3. The ICT project management policy shall include all of the following elements:
(a) project objectives
(b) project governance, including roles and responsibilities;
(c) project planning, timeframe and steps;
(d) project risk assessment;
(e) key milestones;
(f) change management requirements;
(g) testing of all requirements, including security requirements, and respective approval
process when deploying an ICT system in the production environment.
4. Financial entities shall ensure that the staff dedicated to an ICT project includes staff
from business activities or functions impacted by that ICT project and that it has the necessary
knowledge to ensure the secure and successful project implementation.
5. The establishment and progress of ICT projects impacting critical or important functions
and their associated risks shall be reported to the management body, individually or in
aggregation, depending on the importance and size of the ICT projects, periodically and, where
necessary, on an event-driven basis, in accordance with ICT project risk assessment included
in paragraph 3, point (d).
49
Article 16
ICT systems acquisition, development, and maintenance
1. As part of the safeguards to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, financial entities shall develop, document and implement a policy
governing the acquisition, development and maintenance of ICT systems. This policy shall:
(a) identify security practices and methodologies relating to acquisition, development
and maintenance of ICT systems;
(b) require the identification of functional and non-functional requirements relating to
acquisition, development and maintenance of ICT systems, including ICT security
requirements and their approval by the relevant business function and ICT asset owner
according to the financial entity’s internal governance arrangements;
(c) define measures to mitigate the risk of unintentional alteration or intentional
manipulation of the ICT systems during development, maintenance and deployment in the
production environment.
2. Financial entities shall develop, document and implement an ICT systems acquisition,
development, and maintenance procedure, for testing and approval of all ICT systems prior to
their use and after maintenance. The level of testing shall be commensurate to the criticality of
the concerned business procedures and ICT assets. The testing shall be designed to verify that
new ICT systems are adequate to perform as intended, including the quality of the software
developed internally. Financial entities shall use test data and environments that adequately
represent the production environment. In addition:
(a) a CCP shall involve, as appropriate, in the design and conduct of these tests, clearing
members and clients, interoperable CCPs and other interested parties;
(b) a CSD shall, as appropriate, involve in the design and conduct of these tests: users,
critical utilities and critical service providers, other CSDs, other market infrastructures, and
any other institutions with which interdependencies have been identified in its business
continuity policy.
3. Financial entities shall conduct the development and testing in environments which are
segregated from the production environment.
4. Financial entities shall perform source code review covering both static and dynamic
testing. The testing shall include security testing for internet-exposed systems and applications.
Financial entities shall identify and analyse anomalies in the source code, adopt an action plan
to address them and monitor their implementation.
5. Financial entities shall perform security testing of software packages not later than the
integration phase.
50
6. Financial entities shall protect the integrity and confidentiality of data in non-production
environments. Non-production environments shall only store anonymized, pseudonymized or
randomized production data.
7. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, financial entities may store
production data only for specific testing occasions, for limited periods of time and following
the approval by the relevant function and the reporting of such occasions to the ICT risk
management function.
8. Financial entities shall implement controls to protect the integrity of the source code of
ICT systems that are developed in-house or by an ICT third-party service provider and delivered
to the financial entity by an ICT third-parties service provider.
9. The source code and proprietary software provided by ICT third-party service providers
or coming from open-source projects shall be analysed and tested for vulnerabilities and for
absence of malicious codes in accordance with paragraph 4 prior to the deployment in the
production environment.
10. Financial entities’ procedures referred in this article shall also apply to ICT systems
developed or managed by users outside the ICT function, using a risk-based approach. Financial
entities shall establish and maintain a register of these applications that support their critical or
important functions, in line with requirements under Article 5.
Article 17
ICT change management
1. As part of the safeguards to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, financial entities shall develop, document and implement ICT change
management procedures.
2. Financial entities shall include in the ICT change management procedures, in respect of
all changes to software, hardware, firmware components, systems or security parameters, all of
the following elements:
(a) verification that ICT security requirements have been met;
(b) mechanisms to ensure independence between the functions that approve changes and
those responsible for requesting and implementing them;
(c) definition of clear roles and responsibilities to ensure that changes are defined,
planned, that an adequate transition is designed, that the changes are tested and finalised in
a controlled manner and that there is an effective quality assurance;
(d) documentation and communication of change details, including purpose and scope
of the change, the timeline for implementation and the expected outcomes;
51
(e) identification of fall-back procedures and responsibilities, including procedures and
responsibilities for aborting changes or recovering from changes not successfully
implemented;
(f) procedures, protocols and tools to manage emergency changes that provide adequate
safeguards;
(g) procedures to document, re-evaluate, assess and approve after their implementation
emergency changes, including workarounds and patches;
(h) identification of potential impact of a change on existing ICT security measures and
assessment of whether it requires the adoption of additional ICT security measures.
3. After making significant changes to its systems, CCPs and CSDs shall submit their ICT
systems to stringent testing by stimulating stressed conditions:
(a) a CCP shall involve, as appropriate, in the design and conduct of these tests: clearing
members and clients, interoperable CCPs and other interested parties;
(b) a CSD shall, as appropriate, involve in the design and conduct of these tests: users,
critical utilities and critical service providers, other CSDs, other market infrastructures, and
any other institutions with which interdependencies have been identified in its ICT business
continuity policy.
SECTION VIII
Article 18
Physical and environmental security
1. As part of the safeguards to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, financial entities shall define, document and implement a physical and
environmental security policy, which shall be designed according to the threat landscape and to
the classification and overall risk profile of ICT assets and information assets that can be
accessed.
2. The physical and environmental security policy shall include all of the following:
(a) measures to protect the premises, data centres of the financial entity and sensitive
designated areas identified by the financial entity where ICT assets and information assets
reside from unauthorised access, attacks, accidents and from environmental threats and
hazards. The measures to protect from environmental threats and hazards shall be
commensurate with the importance of the premises, data centres, sensitive designated areas
and the criticality of the operations or ICT systems located there;
52
(b) measures to secure ICT assets, both within and outside the premises of the financial
entity, taking into account the results of the ICT risk assessment related to the relevant ICT
assets. The physical and environmental security policy shall include measures to provide
appropriate protection to unattended ICT assets;
(c) measures to ensure the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of ICT
assets, information assets and physical access control devices of the financial entity through
the appropriate maintenance;
(d) measures to preserve availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of the
data, including a clear desk policy for papers and a clear screen policy for information
processing facilities.
SECTION IX
Article 19
ICT and information security awareness and training
1. Financial entities shall include in specific ICT security awareness programmes and
digital operational resilience training elements regarding the security of networks, the
safeguards against intrusions and data misuse and the safeguards to preserve the availability,
authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data, including the cryptographic techniques used.
The ICT security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training shall be
aligned to the overall ICT security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience
training referred to in Article 13(6) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
2. The programmes and training shall be conducted at least yearly and financial entities
shall implement processes to regularly evaluate and review their effectiveness and to
incorporate lessons learned from their analysis of the ICT-related incidents and cyber threat
information into their ICT security awareness programmes and digital operational trainings.
CHAPTER II
HUMAN RESOURCES POLICY AND ACCESS CONTROL
Article 20
Human resources policy
1. As part of their human resource policy, financial entities shall include all the following
ICT security related elements:
(a) identification and assignment of any specific information security responsibilities;
53
(b) requirements for staff and ICT third-party service providers to:
i. be informed about, and adhere to, the financial entity's ICT security policies,
procedures and protocols;
ii. be aware of the reporting channels put in place by the financial entity for the purpose
of detection of anomalous activities, including those established according to
Directive (EU) 2019/1937:
iii. upon termination of employment, requirements for the staff to return to the financial
entity all ICT assets and information assets that belong to the financial entity.
Article 21
Identity management
2. As part of their control of access management rights, financial entities shall develop,
document and implement identity management policies and procedures to ensure the unique
identification and authentication of natural persons and systems accessing the financial entities'
information to enable assignment of user access rights, in accordance with Article 22.
3. These policies and procedures shall include all of the following elements:
(a) A unique identity corresponding to a unique user account shall be assigned to each
staff member of the financial entity or staff of the third-party service providers accessing
the information assets and ICT assets of the financial entity. These identities shall be linked
to a specific natural person also in the case of reorganisation or after the contractual
relationship has ended without prejudice to the retention requirements set out in EU and
national law. Financial entities shall maintain records containing every identity assignment.
(b) A lifecycle management process for identities and accounts managing the creation,
change, recertification, temporary deactivation and termination of user accounts. Where
applicable, financial entities shall deploy automated solutions for the lifecycle identity
management process.
Article 22
Access control
1. As part of their control of access management rights, financial entities shall develop,
document and implement a policy that includes all of the following elements:
(a) access rights to ICT assets based on need-to-know, need-to-use and least privilege
principles, including for remote and emergency access;
54
(b) segregation of duties designed to prevent unjustified access to critical data or to
prevent the allocation of combinations of access rights that may be used to circumvent
controls;
(c) user accountability, by limiting as much as possible the use of generic and shared
user accounts and ensuring that users can be identified for the actions performed in the ICT
systems at all times;
(d) restrictions of access to ICT assets, setting out controls and tools to block
unauthorised access;
(e) account management procedures to grant, change or revoke access rights for user
and generic accounts, including generic administrator accounts. The procedures shall
include all the following:
i. the assignment of roles and responsibilities for granting, reviewing, and revoking
access rights. Retention period for logs shall be defined in accordance with Article
12(2), point (d).
ii. assignment of privileged, emergency and administrator access on a need-to-use or an
ad-hoc basis for all ICT systems. Whenever possible, for the performance of
administrative tasks on ICT systems, dedicated accounts shall be used. Where
applicable, financial entities shall deploy automated solutions for the privilege access
management.
iii. withdrawal of access rights upon termination of employment or when the access is
no longer required, without undue delay.
iv. review of access rights, at least once a year for all ICT systems, other than critical
ICT systems and at least every six months for ICT systems supporting critical or
important functions. Review of access rights shall be performed also whenever a
change is necessary at user level.
(f) authentication methods including all the following:
i. the use of authentication methods commensurate to the classification and overall risk
profile of ICT assets and considering leading practices;
ii. the use of strong authentication methods in accordance with leading practices and
techniques for remote access to the financial entity's network, for privileged access,
for access to ICT assets supporting critical or important functions or that are publicly
accessible.
(g) physical access controls measures including:
i. identification of natural persons who are authorised to enter the critical locations of
operation of the financial entity and the recording of every entry to its premises;
55
ii. granting of physical access rights to critical ICT assets to authorised persons only
according to the need-to-know, least privilege principles and on an ad-hoc basis.
iii. monitoring of physical access to premises, data centres and sensitive designated areas
identified by the financial entity where ICT and information assets reside. The
monitoring should be commensurate to the classification of the assets and the
criticality of the area accessed.
iv. review of physical access rights to ensure that unnecessary access rights are promptly
revoked.
CHAPTER III
ICT-RELATED INCIDENT DETECTION AND RESPONSE
Article 23
ICT-related incident management policy
1. As part of the mechanisms to detect anomalous activities and ICT-related incidents, the
financial entities shall develop, document, and implement an ICT-related incident policy
through which they shall:
(a) document the ICT-related incident management process referred to in Article 17 of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
(b) establish a list of contacts with internal functions and external stakeholders that are
directly involved in ICT operations security, including on detection and monitoring cyber
threats, detection of anomalous activities and vulnerability management;
(c) establish, implement and operate technical, organisational, and operational
mechanisms to support the ICT-related incident policy, including mechanisms to enable a
prompt detection of anomalous activities and behaviours in accordance with Article 24 of
this Regulation;
(d) retain all evidence relating to ICT-related incidents for a period no longer than
necessary for the purposes for which the data is collected and commensurate with the
criticality of the affected business functions, supporting processes and ICT and information
assets. This evidence shall be retained in a secure manner and in accordance with the
relevant provisions on personal data.
(e) establish and implement mechanisms to analyse recurring ICT-related incidents and
patterns in the number and the occurrence of ICT-related incidents;
(f) review and update at least once a year the ICT-related incident management policy,
its procedures, protocols, and tools. The ICT response and recovery plans shall be reviewed
against a range of different plausible scenarios.
56
Article 24
Anomalous activities detection and criteria for ICT-related incidents detection and
response
1. Financial entities shall set clear roles and responsibilities to effectively detect and
respond to ICT-related incidents and anomalous activities.
2. To detect anomalous activities that can result in ICT network performance issues and
ICT-related incidents in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, financial
entities shall implement detection mechanisms allowing them to:
(a) collect and analyse all the following information on:
i. internal and external factors, including business and ICT administrative functions;
ii. potential internal and external threats, including usual scenarios of detection used by
threat actors and scenarios based on threat intelligence activity
(b) identify and implement tools generating alerts of anomalous activities and behaviour,
at least for ICT assets and information assets supporting critical or important functions. This
shall include tools that provide automated alerts based on pre-defined rules to identify any
anomalies with the completeness and the integrity of the data sources, monitor the log
collection and issue an alert if the log collection failed;
(c) define the alerts referred to in point (b), to allow the detection of ICT-related
incidents to be managed within the expected recovery time, both during and outside working
hours
(d) proactively monitor and analyse the logs collected in accordance with Article 12
ensuring that all scenarios identified under point 2(a)(ii), and the alerts specified in point (b)
of this paragraph;
(e) record, analyse and evaluate all information on all anomalous activities and
behaviours automatically where possible, or manually by staff;
3. Any recording of the anomalous activities shall be protected against tampering and
unauthorised access at rest, in use, where relevant, and in transit.
4. The financial entity shall log all relevant information for each detected anomalous
activity, to enable identification of the data, time of occurrence and detection and the type of
the anomalous activity.
5. Financial entities shall consider all the following criteria to trigger ICT-related incident
detection and response processes:
(a) indications that malicious activity may have been carried out in an ICT system or
network or that such ICT system or network may have been compromised;
57
(b) data losses detected, in relation to availability, authenticity, integrity and,
confidentiality of data;
(c) adverse impact detected on financial entity's transactions and operations;
(d) ICT Systems and network unavailability;
(e) problems reported by users of the financial entity;
(f) ICT-related incident notification from an ICT third-party service provider of the
financial entity detected in the ICT systems and networks of the ICT third-party service
provider and which may affect the financial entity.
(g) for the response processes financial entities shall also consider the criticality of the
services affected;
CHAPTER IV
ICT BUSINESS CONTINUITY MANAGEMENT
Article 25
Components of the ICT business continuity policy
1. Financial entities shall include in the ICT business continuity policy all of the following:
(a) definition of the objectives, including the interrelation of ICT and overall business
continuity, and considering the results of the business impact analysis (BIA) referred to in
Article 11(5) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
(b) definition of the scope, including limitations and exclusions, to be covered by the
ICT business continuity arrangements, plans, procedures and mechanisms;
(c) definition of the timeframe to be covered by the ICT business continuity
arrangements, plans, procedures and mechanisms;
(d) description of the criteria to activate ICT business continuity plans, ICT response
and recovery plans and crisis communications plans;
(e) provisions on the governance and organisation including roles, responsibilities and
escalation procedures to implement the ICT business continuity policy and to ensure that
sufficient resources are available;
(f) provisions on the alignment between the ICT business continuity plans and the
overall business continuity plans. The alignment shall concern at least all of the following:
i. potential failure scenarios, including those listed in Article 27(2);
58
ii. recovery objectives, specifying that the financial entity shall be able to recover the
operations of its critical or important functions after disruptions within a recovery
time objective and a recovery point objective;
(g) provisions on the development of specific ICT business continuity plans for severe
business disruptions, prioritising ICT business continuity actions using a risk-based
approach;
(h) provisions on the development, testing and review of ICT response and recovery
plans, in accordance with Articles 26 and 27;
(i) provisions on the review of the effectiveness of the implemented ICT business
continuity arrangements, plans, procedures and mechanisms, in accordance with Article 26;
(j) provisions to align the ICT business continuity policy to the communication policy
referred to in Article 14 (2) and to communication and crisis communication actions referred
to in Article 11(2)(e) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
2. In addition to the requirements referred to in paragraph 1, central counterparties shall
ensure that their ICT business continuity policy:
(a) includes a maximum recovery time for its critical functions that is not higher than
two hours. End of day procedures and payments shall be completed on the required time
and day in all circumstances.
(b) takes into account external links and interdependencies within the financial
infrastructures including trading venues cleared by the central counterparty, securities
settlement and payment systems and credit institutions used by the central counterparty or
a linked central counterparty;
(c) requires that arrangements are in place to:
i. ensure continuity of their critical or important functions based on disaster scenarios.
These arrangements shall at least address the availability of adequate human
resources, the maximum downtime of critical functions, and fail over and recovery
to a secondary site;
ii. maintain a secondary processing site capable of ensuring continuity of their critical
or important functions identical to the primary site. The secondary processing site
shall have a geographical risk profile which is distinct from that of the primary site;
iii. maintain or have an immediate access to a secondary business site, at least, to allow
staff to ensure continuity of the service if the primary location of business is not
available;
iv. consider the need for additional processing sites, in particular if the diversity of the
risk profiles of the primary and secondary sites does not provide sufficient confidence
59
that the central counterparty’s business continuity objectives will be met in all
scenarios.
3. In addition to the requirements referred to in paragraph 1, central securities depositories
shall ensure that the ICT business continuity policy:
(a) takes into account any links and interdependencies to at least users, critical utilities
and critical service providers, other central securities depositories and other market
infrastructures.
(b) requires its ICT business continuity arrangements to ensure that the recovery time
objective for their critical or important functions shall not be longer than two hours.
4. In addition to the requirements referred to in paragraph 1, trading venues shall ensure
that its ICT business continuity arrangements allow trading can be resumed within or close to
two hours of a disruptive incident and that the maximum amount of data that may be lost from
any IT service of the trading venue after a disruptive incident is close to zero.
Article 26
Testing of the ICT business continuity plans
1. Financial entities shall test the ICT business continuity plans taking into account the
financial entity’s BIA and the ICT risk assessment referred to in Article 3(1) point (b) of this
Regulation.
2. Financial entities shall assess through the testing of their ICT business continuity plans
whether they are able to sustain the viability of their business until critical operations are re-
established. The testing of the ICT business continuity plan shall:
(a) be performed on the basis of realistic test scenarios that simulate potential disruption,
including an adequate set of severe but plausible scenarios. The testing scenarios considered
for the development of the business continuity plans shall always be included in the testing;
(b) include the testing of ICT services provided by ICT third-parties service providers,
where applicable;
(c) include the successful switchover of critical business functions, supporting processes
and information assets to the disaster recovery environment and demonstrating that they can
be run in this way for a sufficiently representative period of time and that normal functioning
can be restored afterwards;
(d) be designed to challenge the assumptions on which business continuity plans rest,
including governance arrangements and crisis communication plans;
60
(e) include procedures to verify the ability of the financial entities staff, of ICT third-
party service providers, of ICT systems and ICT services to respond adequately to the
scenarios defined in Article 27(2).
3. In addition to the requirements referred to in paragraph 2, for central counterparties the
testing of their ICT business continuity plans shall include the involvement of clearing
members, external providers and relevant institutions in the financial infrastructure with which
interdependencies have been identified in its business continuity policy.
4. In addition to the requirements referred to in paragraph 2, for central securities
depositories the testing of their ICT business continuity plans shall include the participation of,
as appropriate, users of the central securities depositories, critical utilities and critical service
providers, other central securities depositories, other market infrastructures and any other
institutions with which interdependencies have been identified in its business continuity policy.
5. Test results shall be documented and any identified deficiencies resulting from the tests
should be analysed, addressed and reported to the management body.
6. Financial entities shall review ICT business continuity plans at least once a year taking
into account the results of the tests, the most recent threat intelligence and lessons derived from
previous events, and, where relevant, any changes in the recovery objectives, including
recovery time objectives and recovery point objectives, and/or changes in the business
functions, supported by ICT processes and information assets.
Article 27
ICT response and recovery plans
1. Financial entities shall develop ICT response and recovery plans taking into account the
results of the BIA. The ICT response and recovery plans shall:
(a) specify the conditions prompting their activation and any exceptions;
(b) describe what actions shall be taken to ensure the availability, integrity, continuity
and recovery of at least the critical ICT systems and service of the financial entities;
(c) be designed to meet the recovery objectives of the operations of financial entities;
(d) be documented and made available to the staff involved in the execution of the plan
and readily accessible in case of emergency. Financial entities shall clearly define roles and
responsibilities to that extent;
(e) provide for both short-term and long-term recovery options including partial systems
and recovery;
(f) lay down the objectives of the plan and the conditions to declare successful execution
of the plan;
61
(g) be updated in accordance with lessons derived from ICT-related incidents, results of
tests, newly identified risks and threats, and recovery objectives and priorities amended in
accordance with recommendations stemming from audit checks or supervisory reviews.
2. The ICT response and recovery plans shall identify relevant scenarios, including
scenarios of severe business disruptions and increased likelihood of occurrence of disruption.
The response and recovery plans shall develop scenarios based on current information on
threats and on lessons learned from previous occurrences of business disruptions. The scenarios
shall include all of the following:
(a) cyber-attacks and switchovers between the primary ICT infrastructure and the
redundant capacity, backups and redundant facilities;
(b) scenarios in which the quality of the provision of a critical or important function
deteriorates to an unacceptable level or fails, and duly considers the potential impact of the
insolvency, or other failures, of any relevant ICT third-party service provider;
(c) partial or total failure of premises, including office and business premises, and data
centres;
(d) substantial failure of ICT assets or of the communication infrastructure;
(e) the non-availability of a critical number of staff or key staff members;
(f) natural disasters, pandemic situations and physical attacks, including intrusions and
terrorist attacks;
(g) insider attack;
(h) political and social instability, including, where relevant, in the jurisdiction from
where the ICT third-party service provider provides its services and the location where the
data is stored and processed;
(i) widespread power outage.
3. The ICT response and recovery plans shall consider alternative options where the
primary recovery measures may not be feasible in the short term because of cost, risks, logistics
or unforeseen circumstances.
4. As part of the response and recovery plans, financial entities shall consider and
implement continuity measures to mitigate failures of ICT third-party service providers which
are of key importance for a financial institution’s ICT service continuity.
62
CHAPTER V
REPORT ON THE ICT RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK REVIEW
Article 28
Format and content
1. Financial entities shall develop and document the report referred to in Article 6(5) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 in a searchable electronic format.
2. Financial entities shall include all of the following information in the report:
(a) an introductory section which:
i. clearly identifies the financial entity which is the subject of the report, and describes
its group structure where relevant;
ii. describes the purpose of the report;
iii. describes the context of the report in terms of the nature, scale and complexity of the
financial entity's services, activities and operations, its organisation, identified critical
functions, strategy, major ongoing projects or activities, relationships and its
dependence on in-house and contracted ICT services and systems (or the implications
of the total loss or severe degradation of such systems would mean in terms of critical
or important functions and market efficiency);
iv. summarises major changes in the ICT risk management framework since the previous
report;
v. provides an executive level summary of the current and near-term ICT risk profile,
threat landscape, the assessed effectiveness of its controls and hence security posture
of the financial entity;
(b) date of the approval of the report by the management body of the financial entity;
(c) description of the reason for the review of the ICT risk management framework in
accordance with Article 6 (5) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. Where the review was initiated
following supervisory instructions or conclusions derived from relevant digital operational
resilience testing or audit processes, the report shall contain explicit references to such
documents or instructions, allowing the identification of the reason for initiating the review.
Where the review was initiated following ICT-related incidents, the report shall contain the
list of all ICT-related incidents with incident root-cause analysis;
(d) start and end dates of the review period;
(e) indication of the function responsible for the review;
63
(f) description of the major changes and improvements to the ICT risk management
framework since the previous review. This description shall include an analysis of the
impact of the changes on the financial entity's digital operational resilience strategy, on the
financial entity's ICT internal control framework and on the financial entity's ICT risk
management governance;
(g) summary of the findings of the review and detailed analysis and assessment of the
severity of the weaknesses, deficiencies and gaps in the ICT risk management framework
during the review period;
(h) description of the measures to address identified weaknesses, deficiencies and gaps,
including all of the following:
i. summary of measures taken to remediate to identified weaknesses, deficiencies and
gaps;
ii. expected date for implementing the measures and dates related to the internal control
of the implementation, including information on the state of progress of their
implementation as at the date of drafting of the report, explaining where applicable if
there is a risk that deadlines may not be respected;
iii. tools to be used and identification of the staff in charge for carrying out the measures,
detailing whether they are internal or external;
iv. description of the impact of the changes envisaged in the measures on the financial
entity's budgetary, human and material resources, including resources dedicated to
the implementation of corrective measures;
v. information on the process for informing the competent authority in case of major
and immediate deficiency;
vi. if the weaknesses, deficiencies or gaps identified are not subject to remedial
measures, a detailed explanation of the criteria used to analyse their impact, to
evaluate the related residual risk and for the acceptance of such a risk;
(i) information on planned further developments;
(j) overall conclusions on the review of the ICT risk management framework;
(k) information on past reviews:
i. list of past reviews to date;
ii. if applicable, state of implementation of remedying measures identified by the last
report;
iii. where applicable, description of whether the proposed remedying measures in past
reviews have proven ineffective or created unexpected challenges, and how they
could be improved;
64
(l) sources of information used in the preparation of the report, including all of the
following but not limited to:
i. results from internal audit,
ii. results from compliance assessments,
iii. results from digital operational resilience testing, and advanced testing of ICT tools,
systems and processes based on TLPT,
iv. external sources.
CHAPTER VI
PROPORTIONALITY PRINCIPLE
Article 29
Complexity and risk considerations
For the purposes of defining and implementing ICT risk management tools, methods, processes
and policies referred to in Articles 1 to 28 elements of increased complexity or risk shall be
taken into account, including elements relating to encryption and cryptography, ICT operations
security, network security, ICT project and change management, and the potential impact of the
ICT risk on confidentiality, integrity and availability of data, and of the disruptions on the
continuity and availability of the financial entity’s activities.
65
TITLE II – SIMPLIFIED ICT RISK
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
CHAPTER I
SIMPLIFIED ICT RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
Article 30
Governance and organisation
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall have
in place an internal governance and control frameworks that ensure an effective and prudent
management of ICT risk, to achieve a high level of digital operational resilience.
2. As part of their ICT risk management framework, the financial entities shall ensure that
their management body:
(a) bears the overall responsibility for ensuring that the ICT Risk Management
Framework enables the achievement of the financial entity’s business strategy and risk
appetite, and ensures that ICT risk is considered in this context;
(b) sets clear roles and responsibilities for all ICT-related tasks;
(c) sets out information security objectives and ICT requirements;
(d) approves, oversees, and periodically reviews the financial entity’s:
i. information assets, list of main risks identified, business impact analysis and related
policies;
ii. business continuity plans and response and recovery measures, referred to, in Article
16(1)(f) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 ;
(e) allocates and reviews at least yearly the appropriate budget to fulfil the financial
entity’s digital operational resilience needs in respect of all types of resources, including
relevant ICT security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training , and
ICT skills for all staff;
(f) defines and implements the policies and measures included in Article 31 to identify,
assess and manage ICT risk the financial entity is exposed to;
(g) identify and implement procedures, ICT protocols and tools that are necessary to
protect all information assets and ICT assets;
66
(h) keeps staff of the financial entity up to date with sufficient knowledge and skills to
understand and assess ICT risk and its impact on the operations of the financial entity,
commensurate to the ICT risk being managed;
(i) sets out reporting arrangements, including the frequency, form, and content of
reporting to the management body on the information security and digital operational
resilience.
3. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 may, in accordance with Union and national
sectoral law, outsource the tasks of verifying compliance with ICT risk management
requirements to intra-group or external undertakings. In case of such outsourcing, the financial
entity remains fully responsible for the verification of compliance with the ICT risk
management requirements.
4. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure appropriate segregation and
independence of control functions and internal audit functions.
5. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that the ICT risk management
framework is subject to an internal audit by auditors, in line with the financial entities’ audit
plan. Auditors shall possess sufficient knowledge, skills and expertise in ICT risk, as well as
appropriate independence. The frequency and focus of ICT audits shall be commensurate to the
ICT risk of the financial entity.
6. Based on the conclusions from the audit referred to in paragraph 5, financial entities
referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure the timely verification and remediation of critical ICT
audit findings.
Article 31
Information security policy and measures
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall
develop and document an information security policy in the context of the ICT risk management
framework. The information security policy shall define the high-level principles and rules to
protect the confidentiality, integrity, availability and authenticity of data and the services
financial entities provide.
2. Based on their information security policy, financial entities referred to in paragraph 1
shall establish and implement ICT security measures to mitigate their exposure to ICT risk,
including mitigating measures implemented by third party providers.
3. These ICT security measures shall include:
(a) classification of information assets and ICT assets;
(b) ICT-related incident management;
67
(c) access control;
(d) physical and environmental security;
(e) ICT operations security;
(f) ICT security testing;
(g) ICT systems, acquisition, development, and maintenance;
(h) ICT project and change management
Article 32
Classification of information assets and ICT assets
1. As part of the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 16(1)(a) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554 shall identify, classify, and document all critical or important functions, the
information assets and ICT assets supporting them and their interdependencies. Financial
entities shall review the identification and classification as needed.
2. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall identify all critical or important
functions supported by ICT third-party service providers.
Article 33
ICT risk management
1. The ICT risk management framework of financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall include all of the following elements relating to the ICT
management:
(a) determine the risk tolerance levels for ICT risk, in accordance with the risk appetite
of the financial entity;
(b) identify and assess the internal and external ICT and information security risks to
which the financial entity is exposed;
(c) define mitigation strategies at least for the ICT risk that are not within the risk
tolerance levels of the financial entity;
(d) monitor the effectiveness of these measures;
(e) identify and assess whether there are any ICT and information security risks resulting
from any major change in ICT system or ICT services, processes, or procedures, from ICT
security testing results and after any major ICT-related incident.
68
2. The ICT risk assessment shall be carried out and documented periodically
commensurate to the financial entities’ overall risk profile.
3. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that they continuously monitor
threats and vulnerabilities relevant to their critical or important functions, supporting
information and ICT assets and shall regularly review the risk scenarios impacting them.
4. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall define alert thresholds and criteria to
trigger and initiate ICT-related incident response processes as part of their ICT-related incident
management process under Article 17(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
Article 34
Physical and environmental security
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall
identify and implement physical security measures, which shall be designed according to the
threat landscape and to the classification and overall risk profile of ICT assets and information
assets that can be accessed.
2. The measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall protect the premises and, where
applicable, data centres of the financial entity where ICT assets and information assets reside,
from unauthorised access, attacks, accidents and from environmental threats and hazards.
3. The protection from environmental threats and hazards shall be commensurate with the
importance of the premises and, where applicable, the data centres, and the criticality of the
operations or ICT systems located there.
CHAPTER II
FURTHER ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS, PROTOCOLS, AND TOOLS TO MINIMISE THE IMPACT OF
ICT RISK
Article 35
Access Control
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall define,
document, and implement procedures for logical and physical access control and shall enforce,
monitor, and periodically review these procedures. These procedures shall define the following
logical and physical access control elements:
(a) access rights to information assets, ICT assets and their supported functions, critical
locations of operation of the financial entity, shall be managed on a need-to-know, need-to-
use and least privileges basis, including for remote and emergency access;
69
(b) user accountability, thereby ensuring that users can be identified for the actions
performed in the ICT systems;
(c) account management procedures to grant, change or revoke access rights for use and
generic accounts, including generic administrator accounts. Assignment of privileged,
emergency and administrator access on a need-to-use or an ad-hoc basis for all ICT systems
and shall be logged in accordance with Article 36(f);
(d) the use of authentication methods commensurate to the classification and overall risk
profile of ICT assets and considering leading practices. The use of strong authentication
methods in accordance with leading practices for remote access to the financial entities’
network, for privileged access, and for access to ICT assets supporting critical or important
functions that are publicly available;
(e) access rights shall be periodically reviewed and shall be withdrawn when no longer
required.
Article 36
ICT operations security
1. As part of their systems, protocols and tools, and for ICT assets supporting critical or
important functions, financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554
shall:
(a) monitor and manage the life cycle of these ICT assets, to ensure that they continue
to meet and support business and risk management requirements;
(b) monitor whether these ICT assets are supported by their external or internal vendors
and developers, if applicable,
(c) identify capacity requirements of their ICT systems and measures to maintain and
improve availability and efficiency of ICT systems and prevent ICT capacity shortages
before they materialise;
(d) perform automated vulnerability scanning and assessments on ICT assets
commensurate to their classification and overall risk profile of the ICT asset, and deploy
patches to address identified vulnerabilities;
(e) manage the risks related to outdated or unsupported and legacy ICT assets;
(f) log events related to logical and physical access control, ICT operations, including
system and network traffic activities, ICT change management. The level of detail of the
logs shall be aligned with their purpose and usage of the ICT asset producing the logs;
(g) identify and implement measures to monitor and analyse logs to detect anomalies for
critical or important ICT operations;
70
(h) implement measures to monitor relevant and up-to-date information about cyber
threats;
(i) implement measures to identify possible information leakages, malicious code and
other security threats, and publicly known vulnerabilities in software and hardware and shall
check for corresponding new security updates.
Article 37
Data, System and Network Security
1. As part of their systems, protocols and tools, financial entities referred to in Article
16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall develop and implement safeguards to ensuring the
security of networks, against intrusions and data misuse and to preserve the availability,
authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data.
2. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall perform all of the following related to
data, ICT system and network security, in accordance with the classification performed
pursuant to Article 32:
(a) measures to protect data in use, in transit and at rest;
(b) identification of security measures regarding the use of software, data storage media,
systems and endpoint devices transferring and storing data of the financial entity;
(c) identification and implementation of measures to prevent and detect unauthorised
connections to the financial entity's network and to secure the network traffic between the
financial entity’s internal networks and the internet and other external connections;
(d) identification of measures ensuring the availability, authenticity, integrity and,
confidentiality of data during network transmission
(e) process to securely delete data on premises or stored externally that the financial
entity no longer needs to collect or store;
(f) process to securely dispose or decommission of data storage devices on premises or
stored externally containing confidential information;
(g) the implementation of measures to ensure that teleworking and the use of private
endpoint devices, does not adversely impact the financial entity’s ability to carry out their
critical activities in an adequate, timely and secure manner;
(h) where relevant, the implementation of strong technical and organisational security
measures on the credentials used to access the cloud client interface to manage the cloud
computing resource.
71
Article 38
ICT security testing
1. For the purposes of Article 16(3), first subparagraph, point (d) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554, financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall
establish and implement an ICT security testing plan to validate the effectiveness of their ICT
security measures developed in accordance with Chapters II and III of this Title, and ensure
that this plan considers threats and vulnerabilities, identified as part of the Article 33(3).
2. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that reviews, assessments, and
tests of ICT security measures are conducted taking into consideration the overall risk profile
of the financial entity.
3. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall monitor and evaluate the results of the
security tests and update their security measures accordingly without undue delay in the case
of critical ICT systems.
Article 39
ICT systems acquisition, development, and maintenance
1. Where applicable, financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554 shall implement a procedure governing the acquisition, development, and
maintenance of ICT systems and shall design this procedure following a risk-based approach.
The procedure governing the acquisition, development, and maintenance of ICT systems shall:
(a) ensure that, before any acquisition or development of ICT systems takes place, the
functional and non-functional requirements, including information security requirements,
are clearly defined, and approved by the relevant business management;
(b) ensure the testing and approval of ICT systems prior to their first use and before
introducing changes to the production environment;
(c) identify measures to mitigate the risk of unintentional alteration or intentional
manipulation of the ICT systems during development and implementation in the production
environment.
Article 40
ICT project and change management
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall
develop, document and implement an ICT project management procedure, and define the roles
72
and responsibilities for its implementation. The ICT project management procedure shall cover
all stages of the ICT projects from its initiation to its closure.
2. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall develop, document and implement an
ICT change management procedure to ensure that all changes to ICT systems are recorded,
tested, assessed, approved, implemented and verified in a controlled manner and with the
adequate safeguards to preserve the financial entity’s digital operational resilience.
CHAPTER III
ICT BUSINESS CONTINUITY MANAGEMENT
Article 41
Components of the ICT business continuity plan
1. As part of the overall business continuity policy, financial entities referred to in Article
16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall conduct a business impact analysis (BIA) of their
exposures and potential impact to severe business disruptions. The BIA shall consider the
criticality of identified business functions, supporting processes, information assets and ICT
assets, third-party dependencies, and their interdependencies.
2. As part of the preparation of the ICT business continuity plan, financial entities referred to
in paragraph 1 shall identify a range of scenarios to which its ICT assets supporting critical
or important functions might be exposed, including a cyber-attack scenario, and the
assessment of the potential impact that such scenarios might have.
3. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall develop the ICT business continuity plans
considering the results of the BIA referred to in paragraph 1 and the scenarios referred to in
paragraph 2.
4. The ICT business continuity plans shall:
(a) be approved by the management body of the financial entity;
(b) be documented and readily accessible in the event of an emergency or crisis,
(c) allocate sufficient resources to execute the plan;
(d) establish planned recovery levels and timeframes for recovery and resumption of
functions and key internal and external dependencies including third party service providers;
(a) specify what conditions may prompt activation of the plans and what actions shall
be taken to ensure the availability, continuity, and recovery of the financial entities’ ICT
assets, supporting critical or important functions;
73
(e) identify restoration and recovery measures for critical or important business
functions, supporting processes, information assets and their interdependencies to avoid
adverse effects on the functioning of financial entities. These measures shall include
mitigation of failures of critical third-party providers as well;
(f) identify backup policies and procedures specifying the scope of the data that is
subject to the backup, and the minimum frequency of the backup, based on the criticality of
the function using those data;
(g) consider alternative options where recovery may not be feasible in the short term
because of costs, risks, logistics or unforeseen circumstances;
(h) specify the internal and external communication arrangements including escalation
plans;
(i) identify insurance arrangements in place and insurance notification procedures to be
followed in the event of loss from material interruptions;
(j) be updated in line with lessons learned from incidents, tests, new risks and threats
identified, changed recovery objectives, major changes to the financial entity’s organisation
and to the ICT assets supporting critical or business functions.
Article 42
Testing of business continuity plans
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall test their
business continuity plans referred to in Article 41, including the scenarios defined in
paragraph 2, at least every year for the back-up and restore procedures or at every major
change of the business continuity plan.
2. The testing of their business continuity plans shall demonstrate that the financial entities
referred to in paragraph 1 are able to sustain the viability of their businesses until critical
operations are re-established and identify any deficiencies in the business continuity plan.
3. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall document the test results of the testing of
business continuity plans and any identified deficiencies resulting from the tests should be
analysed, addressed and reported to the management body.
74
CHAPTER IV
REPORT ON THE REVIEW OF THE ICT RMF
Article 43
Format and content
1. Financial entities referred to in Article 16(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 shall
develop and document the report referred to in Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 in
a searchable electronic format.
2. Financial entities referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the following information in
the report:
(a) an introductory section which:
(i) describes the context of the report in terms of the nature, scale and complexity of
the financial entity's services, activities and operations, its organisation, identified
critical functions, strategy, major ongoing projects or activities, relationships and
its dependence on in house and outsourced ICT services and systems (or the
impact of the total loss or severe degradation of such systems on critical or
important functions and market efficiency);
(ii) provides an executive level summary of the current and near-term ICT risk
identified, threat landscape, the assessed effectiveness of its controls and hence
security posture of the financial entity;
(iii)provides information about the reported area;
(iv) provides list of changes which were done in the reported area;
(v) summarises and specifies impact of major changes to the ICT risk management
framework since the previous report;
(b) where applicable, date and evidence of the approval of the report by the management
body of the financial entity in accordance with Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554;
(c) description of the reason(s) for the review, including:
(i) in case the review has been initiated following supervisory instructions, evidence
of such instructions;
(ii) in case the review has been initiated following the occurrence of ICT-related
incidents, the list of all ICT-related incidents with related incident root-cause
analysis;
(d) start and end date of the review period;
75
(e) the person responsible for the review;
(f) a summary of findings and a self-assessment of the severity of the weaknesses,
deficiencies, and gaps identified in ICT risk management framework for the review period,
including a detailed analysis;
(g) remedying measures identified to address weaknesses, deficiencies, and gaps in the
ICT risk management framework and expected date for implementing these measures
including follow-up of weaknesses, deficiencies, and gaps identified in previous reports, if
they have not been remedied;
(h) overall conclusions on the review of the ICT risk management framework, including
any further planned developments.
76
77
5. Annex I: Draft impact assessment
1. As per Article 15(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 (EBA Regulation), of Regulation (EU) No
1094/2010 (EIOPA Regulation) and Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 (ESMA regulation), any draft
regulatory technical standards developed by the ESAs shall be accompanied by an Impact
Assessment (IA) which analyses ‘the potential related costs and benefits’.
2. This analysis presents the IA of the main policy options included in this Consultation Paper (CP) on
regulatory technical standards (RTS) to specify the detailed content of the policy in relation to the
contractual arrangements on the further harmonisation of ICT risk management tools, methods,
processes and policies and the simplified ICT risk management framework.
Problem identification
3. Complexity of information and communication technology (ICT) risk is increasing and frequency of
ICT-related incidents, including cyber incidents, is rising together with their potential significant
adverse impact on the financial institutions’ operational functioning. Moreover, due to the
interconnectedness between financial institutions, ICT related incidents risk causing potential
systemic impact.
4. DORA introduces requirements for a minimum risk management framework for financial entities,
in order to address the increasing complexity and evolving nature of cybersecurity threats they face,
ensuring the protection of their critical systems, availability, authenticity, integrity and
confidentiality of data, including their customers’ data, and maintaining the stability and integrity
of the financial sector.
5. DORA also introduces a simplified risk management framework recognising that smaller financial
entities may have limited resources and capabilities to implement and maintain comprehensive risk
management practices. By providing a simplified framework, DORA aims to facilitate the adoption
of effective risk management measures and promote cybersecurity resilience among all financial
entities, regardless of their size or complexity, ultimately contributing to a more secure and resilient
financial ecosystem.
6. In this context, the ESAs have been mandated under Article 15 and 16(3) Regulation (EU) 2022/2554
to develop draft RTS to specify further details and components of ICT risk management framework
referred to in Article 6(1) and of the simplified risk management framework referred to in Article
16 (1).
78
Policy objectives
7. The draft RTS specifying the further details and components of ICT risk management framework
and of the simplified risk management framework aims to establish a common risk framework for
all EU financial entities in a manner that is proportionate to their size and overall risk profile, and
the nature, scale and complexity of their services, activities and operations. The objective of these
RTS is to enable financial entities to manage their ICT risk and information security risk.
Baseline scenario
8. With the entry into force of DORA, financial entities that are not subject to Article 16 of DORA must
comply with Chapter II “ICT risk management”, Section II of the same regulation. Financial entities
subject to Article 16 of DORA must comply with this article.
9. The above legal requirements form the baseline scenario of the impact assessment, i.e. the impact
caused by DORA is not assessed within this impact assessment, which focuses only on areas where
further specifications have been provided in the regulatory technical standards.
10. The following overarching aspects have been considered when developing the proposed RTS.
POLICY ISSUE 1: TECHNOLOGY NEUTRALITY
Options considered
11. Option A: the RTS should adopt a technology-neutral approach to allow financial entities flexibility
in selecting and implementing risk management measures, considering the evolving landscape of
technologies.
12. Option B: The RTS should include specific provisions and references to certain technological
standards addressing technology-related risks and controls, taking into account the unique
challenges and vulnerabilities associated with different technologies used by financial entities.
13. Option C: The RTS should adopt a technology-neutral approach to allow financial entities flexibility
in selecting and implementing risk management measures, considering the evolving landscape of
technologies. At the same time, the RTS shall include some limited provisions related to the cloud
computing paradigm, considering that (a) cloud computing is not a technology itself, (b) financial
entities increasingly rely on cloud computing resources, and (c) there are some particularities in the
model that need to be identified.
Cost-benefit analysis
79
14. By adopting a technology-neutral approach, the RTS can provide a framework that is adaptable to
different technological advancements and avoids being outdated or restrictive.
15. By including technology-specific provisions, the RTS can provide clear guidance on recommended
risk management practices tailored to the specific technologies employed, ensuring a higher level
of security and resilience in the financial industry.
16. A balanced approach based on a technology-neutral stance while including limited provisions
specific to cloud computing would allow the recognition of the increasing reliance on cloud
computing resources acknowledging its unique characteristics. The RTS can provide targeted
guidance on addressing the associated ICT risks. This approach enhances risk management
practices, promotes regulatory compliance in cloud environments, and instils confidence in
stakeholders.
Preferred option
Option C has been retained, and some questions have been included in the consultation paper in
relation to the identification of specific provisions regarding cloud computing.
POLICY ISSUE 2: PRESCRIPTIVENESS OF THE RTS
Options considered
17. Option A: the RTS should take a rule-based approach i.e., mandate prescriptive requirements going
into details on how to implement specific elements of the risk management framework or its
simplified version.
18. Option B: the RTS should take a principle-based and objective-focused approach.
19. Option C: the RTS shall adopt a principle-based and objective-focused approach. At the same time,
considering (a) the nature of the empowerment to cover in detail certain provisions, and (b) the
need to be more specific in the requirements, to provide clarity to the industry and facilitate the
implementation of the requirements, a combination of principle-based and rule-based approach
have been followed, especially for the articles on network security, data and system security,
encryption and cryptography, and access control.
Cost-benefit analysis
20. If the RTS is designed to be prescriptive, it will provide detailed and specific requirements,
guidelines, and procedures for financial entities to follow in implementing their risk management
framework. This approach aims to ensure consistency and uniformity in risk management practices
across the industry, facilitating easier supervision and regulatory oversight by providing regulators
with clear benchmarks against which to evaluate compliance.
80
21. On the other hand, if the RTS is principle-based, it will focus on providing high-level principles, and
objectives for financial entities to develop and customize their risk management framework based
on their specific circumstances. This approach allows for more flexibility and adaptability, enabling
financial entities to tailor their risk management approach more specifically to their unique
business models and risk profiles, while also promoting effective supervision as regulators can
assess the soundness and effectiveness of the overall risk management framework rather than just
compliance with specific requirements. The principle-based approach encourages financial entities
to exercise judgment and take responsibility for their risk management decisions, while regulators
can monitor the application of the principles and evaluate the effectiveness of the risk management
framework in achieving its intended outcomes.
22. Combining the benefits of a principle-based approach with some rule-based provisions would
strikes a balance between principle-based guidance and necessary rule-based provisions, leading
to effective risk management practices across the financial sector. The principle-based approach
allows for flexibility and adaptability, enabling financial entities to implement risk management
measures tailored to their specific circumstances. This approach encourages innovation and
enables financial entities to respond effectively to the evolving threat landscape. The inclusion of
specific rule-based provisions for critical areas such as network security, data and system security,
encryption and cryptography, and access control enhances clarity, facilitates implementation, and
ensures a minimum level of security standards across the industry. While there may be initial costs
associated with interpreting and implementing the combination approach, the benefits of
flexibility, innovation, clarity, and standardized security measures justify the investment.
Preferred option
Option C has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 3: DEFINITION OF LOGGING RETENTION PERIODS
Options considered
23. Option A: the RTS should define the logging retention periods for all logs it refers to.
24. Option B: the RTS should not define the logging retention periods and leave the decision about such
periods to financial entities.
Cost-benefit analysis
25. On the one hand, if the RTS includes the definition of logging retention periods, it will establish clear
and specific requirements for financial entities regarding the duration for which they must retain
logs of their ICT activities. This approach provides clarity and consistency in record-keeping
81
practices, ensuring that relevant information is available for audit, investigation, and regulatory
oversight purposes. On the other hand, a set duration in this RTS would introduce compliance
concerns with existing regulations and standards at Union, national and international levels, that
already have established logging or data retention periods (including personal data retention), and
to which the financial entities may be subject to.
26. If the RTS does not define logging retention periods but the objective to be achieved, it allows
financial entities to determine the most appropriate duration for retaining logs based on their
individual risk profiles, business needs, and regulatory requirements. This approach acknowledges
the diverse nature of financial entities and the varying factors that may influence their logging
practices, including other Union or national regulations, promoting flexibility while still emphasizing
the importance of maintaining sufficient logs to support risk management, incident response, and
audit and compliance obligations.
Preferred option
Option B has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 4: PROPORTIONALITY PRINCIPLE
Options considered
27. Option A: Introduce a principle-based proportionality article applicable to all financial entities under
the scope of DORA but not subject to Article 16 of that regulation.
28. Options B: Identify specific requirements that could be applied in a differentiated manner to
financial entities, based on their size and overall risk profile, and the nature, scale and complexity
of their services, activities and operations, e.g., frequency of the review or different details to be
included in the ICT policies or procedures aspects.
Cost-benefit analysis
29. DORA already embeds proportionality in three ways: its Article 4 sets out general requirements on
the proportionate application of its requirements, for both financial entities and for competent
authorities, it exempts microenterprises from certain requirements, and it already foresees a
simplified risk management framework for specific entities indicated in Article 16.
30. While somehow repeating level 1, including a general article on proportionality in the RTS would
ensure that this principle is followed by both financial entities and supervisors reducing the overall
costs for the implementation of the RTS and at the same time for the supervision of the said entities,
while leaving them some flexibility in their assessment.
82
31. Identifying in the RTS specific ways to adapt the implementation of the RTS to certain categories
of financial entities would give more guidance and possibly ensure a more harmonised application
of DORA but would leave less flexibility to the financial entities and their supervisors.
Options considered
Both options have been considered by the ESAs to prepare their proposal. Option A has been retained
for the part of the draft RTS based on Article 15 of DORA: Article 29 further specifies some of the
criteria for the application of the proportionality principle that can be considered by financial entities
and competent authorities when doing the proportionality assessment. Option B has been retained to
approach the drafting of the whole part of the draft RTS based on Article 16(3) of DORA (Title II of the
proposed draft RTS, on the simplified ICT risk management framework).
83
6. Annex II: Overview of the
questions for consultation
Q1. Do you agree with the approach followed to incorporate proportionality in the RTS based on
Article 15 of DORA (Title I of the proposed RTS) and in particular its Article 29 (Complexity and risks
considerations)? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Q2. Do you agree with the approach followed for the RTS based on Article 16 of DORA (Title II of
the proposed RTS)? If not, please provide an indication of further proportionality considerations,
detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Q3. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the provisions on governance? If not,
please explain and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
Q4. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT risk management policy and process? If not,
please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q5. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT asset management? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestion.
Q6. Do you consider important for financial entities to keep record of the end date of the
provider’s support or the date of the extended support of ICT assets?
Q7. Do you agree with the suggested approach on encryption and cryptography? If not, please
explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q8. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS in
addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
Q9. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT operations security? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestion.
Q10. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS
in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
Q11. What would be the impact on the financial entities to implement weekly automated
vulnerability scans for all ICT assets, without considering their classification and overall risk profile?
Please provide details and if possible, quantitative data.
Q12. Do you agree with the requirements already identified for cloud computing resources?
Is there any additional measure or control that should be considered specifically for cloud
computing resources in the RTS, beyond those already identified in Article 11(2) point (k)? If yes,
please explain and provide examples.
Q13. Do you agree with the suggested approach on network security? If not, please explain
and provide alternative suggestions.
Q14. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS
in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
Q15. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT project and change management? If
not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
84
Q16. Do you consider that specific elements regarding supply-chain risk should be taken
into consideration in the RTS? If yes, please explain and provide suggestions.
Q17. Do you agree with the specific approach proposed for CCPs and CSDs? If not, please
explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q18. Do you agree with the suggested approach on physical and environmental security? If
not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
Q19. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS
in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
Q20. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT and information security
awareness and training? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestions.
Q21. Do you agree with the suggested approach on Chapter II - Human resources policy and
access control? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q22. Is there any new measure or control that should be taken into consideration in the RTS
in addition to those already identified? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
Q23. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT-related incidents detection
and response, in particular with respect to the criteria to trigger ICT-related incident detection and
response process referred to in Article 24(5) of the proposed RTS? If not, please explain and
provide alternative suggestion.
Q24. Do you agree with the suggested approach on ICT business continuity management? If
not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q25. Do you agree with the suggested specific approach for CCPs, CSDs and trading venues?
If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion.
Q26. Do you agree with the suggested approach on the format and content of the report on
the ICT risk management framework review? If not, please explain and provide alternative
suggestion.
Q27. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the simplified ICT risk
management framework? If not, please explain and provide alternative drafting as necessary.
Q28. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the further elements of systems,
protocols, and tools to minimise the impact of ICT risk under the simplified ICT risk management
framework? If not, please explain and provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
Q29. What would be the impact for financial entities to expand the ICT operation security
requirements for all ICT assets? Please provide details and if possible, quantitative data.
Q30. Are there any additional measures or control that should be considered specifically for
cloud resources in the draft RTS, beyond those already identified in Article 37(2)(h) of the proposed
draft RTS? If yes, please explain and provide examples.
Q31. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding ICT business continuity
management under the simplified ICT risk management framework? If not, please explain and
provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
85
Q32. Do you agree with the suggested approach regarding the article on Format and
content of the report on the simplified ICT risk management review? If not, please explain and
provide alternative suggestion as necessary.
86