JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
JC 2024 34
17 July 2024
Final Report
Joint Guidelines
on the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses caused by
major ICT-related incidents under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554
1
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Contents
1. Executive Summary 3
Next steps 4
2. Background and rationale 5
Background 5
Rationale 5
3. Joint Guidelines on the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major
ICT-related incidents 8
Status of these Joint Guidelines 8
Reporting Requirements 8
Title I - Subject matter, scope, addressees, and definitions 9
Subject matter and Scope of application 9
Addressees 9
Definitions 9
Title II- Implementation 9
Date of application 9
Title III- Provisions on the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses of major ICT-related
incidents 10
Annex: Reporting template for gross costs and losses and financial recoveries in a reference year
12
4. Accompanying documents 13
4.1 Cost- Benefit Analysis / Impact Assessment 13
4.2 Feedback on the public consultation 16
Summary of the responses to the consultation and the ESAs’ analysis 17
2
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
1. Executive Summary
Article 11(11) of Regulation 2022/2554 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector
(DORA) mandates the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), to develop ‘common guidelines on
the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major ICT-related incidents’. These
Guidelines aim at harmonising the estimation by financial entities of their aggregated annual costs
and losses caused by major information and communication technology (ICT)-related incidents
according to Article 11(10) DORA.
In view of the ESAs, this mandate is closely interlinked with the DORA mandates conferred to the
ESAs under Article 18(3) on incident classification and under Article 20 on reporting of incidents as
these also require an assessment of costs and losses of ICT-related incidents. Consequently, the
ESAs seek to achieve consistency across these mandates to avoid contradictions, increase
comparability of the reported figures under the different mandates and, in case the competent
authorities request such information from the financial entities, reduce the reporting burden for
financial entities. All the criteria in the RTS on classification, including, but not limited to, the one
on ‘economic impact’, are designed to ensure proportionality, meaning that small financial entities
are likely to classify ICT-related incidents as “major” less frequently than bigger financial entities.
Proportionality is thereby embedded in all other mandates that build on the classification of ICT-
related incidents as major, including these Guidelines.
In fulfilment of the mandate, the Guidelines therefore set out that financial entities:
• apply the same approach as the regulatory technical standard specifying the criteria for the
classification of ICT-related incidents under Article 18(3) DORA for assessing gross costs and
losses and to apply the same approach as the forthcoming technical standards on incident
reporting under Article 20 DORA for assessing the financial recoveries of major ICT-related
incidents;
• include only those ICT-related incidents that have been classified as major and for which
the financial entity has provided a final incident report according to Article 19(4)(c) DORA
in the reference year, or submitted in previous years if it had an impact on the costs and
losses of that reference year; and
• report the breakdown of the gross costs and losses and financial recoveries by major ICT-
related incident to substantiate the aggregate figures.
The ESAs conducted a public consultation on a draft version of the Guidelines from November 2023
to March 2024 and received seventy consultation responses. After assessing these responses, the
ESAs decided to review their proposal how to set the reference year to allow for more flexibility for
financial entities, that will also reduce their reporting burden. To further limit the reporting burden,
the ESAs also decided to request only the estimation of gross costs and losses, not net costs and
losses, as the competent authorities can calculate those by themselves.
3
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Next steps
The Joint Guidelines will be translated into the official EU languages and published on the ESAs
websites. The deadline for competent authorities to report whether they comply with the
Guidelines will be two months after the publication of the translations. The Guidelines should apply
from 17 January 2025.
4
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
2. Background and rationale
Background
1. Article 11(11) of Regulation 2022/2554 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector
(DORA) mandates the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), which consist of the European
Banking Authority (EBA), the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA)
and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), to develop ‘common guidelines
on the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major ICT-related
incidents’.1 These Guidelines aim at harmonising the estimation by financial entities of their
aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major information and communication
technology (ICT)-related incidents according to Article 11(10) DORA, which are then to be
submitted by financial entities, other than microenterprises, to their competent authority (CA)
upon its request. Costs and losses incurred by the financial entities from non-major ICT-related
incidents are not in the scope of these Guidelines.
2. In fulfilment of the aforementioned mandate and related provisions and recitals, the ESAs
published on 27 November 2023 a Consultation Paper (CP), which set out the ESA’s proposals
for the Guidelines. The CP laid out the proposed content on how to estimate the annual costs
and losses, how to define the one-year period and which figures to use for the estimation of
costs and losses. It concludes with a proposal on the aggregation and estimation of gross and
net costs and losses incurred across major ICT-related incidents. A public hearing was held on
23 January 2023 before the end of the consultation period on 4 March 2024, by which time the
ESAs had received seventy responses which were assessed in detail, as presented in the
feedback table in section 4.2 of this Final Report.
3. The Rationale section below provides an overview of the key changes that have been made
after the public consultation of the draft Guidelines originally proposed.
Rationale
4. The respondents to the public consultation commented on all aspects of the proposed draft
Guidelines. The key points raised that led to changes to the draft Guidelines are a) reviewing
the reference year for which financial entities should provide an estimation to the competent
authority; and b) limiting the costs and losses that should be reported to the competent
authorities. These two points are discussed in this section. Further comments were received
that led to clarifications in the Guidelines, but not to significant changes, as well as comments
that did not lead to any changes. These comments and the ESAs’ analyses of them are
presented in detail in the feedback table in section 4.2.
1 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2022/2554/oj
5
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Reviewing the reference year for which financial entities should provide an estimation
5. Several respondents argued to allow for reporting by calendar year and based on supervisory
reporting or internal risk management figures instead of reporting by financial year and based
on financial statements, because:
• Financial accounts do not include the types of costs that are listed in the RTS on
classification while data on operational risk losses do;
• Reporting requirements under the CRR operational risk framework and DORA should be
harmonised;
• Asset managers already use annual cost estimates for risk management purposes on a
calendar-year basis. Reporting for the financial year would lead to an additional burden for
them.
6. The ESAs’ initial proposal in the Consultation Paper aimed at limiting the reporting burden for
financial entities, as many of them are not subject to regular reporting requirements like credit
institutions that report on operational risks. The responses to the public consultation
confirmed that these entities overwhelmingly support the possibility to base the estimations
on accounting figures, for which it is necessary to stick to the accounting year.
7. Nevertheless, the ESAs acknowledge that especially for credit institutions and other financial
entities that have already established an operational risk framework, it makes more sense to
provide the reporting on already existing reporting requirements for operational risk.
8. Consequently, the ESAs have decided to amend the Guidelines to allow financial entities to
choose which reference year they intend to use. However, once they have decided whether
they will report based on the calendar year or the accounting year, financial entities should
also provide future annual reports on the same type of year. If a financial entity wanted to
change its decision, it should notify the competent authority, who would have a 2-month
period to object to the change of decision. This approach to provide flexibility on which year
to use will make it simpler for financial entities to choose the most appropriate and easily
accessible data source they have. This will especially benefit financial entities that have such
information available via their supervisory reporting, for instance credit institutions.
Limiting the costs and losses that should be reported to the competent authorities
9. Some respondents argued to only include the gross costs while others argued to only include
the net costs in the estimation. The same applies to the reporting of the gross and net costs
and losses and to the reporting template. The gross costs are the costs or losses that the
financial entity paid or booked. The net costs are a simple subtraction of financial recoveries
from the gross costs and losses. As such, the ESAs are of the view that competent authorities
can themselves calculate the net costs and losses. Consequently, the ESAs have arrived at the
view that the requirement to include and report the net costs and losses can be deleted from
6
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
the Guidelines to simplify the reporting requirements for financial entities. However, the
estimate of the financial recoveries has been maintained in the Guidelines, in addition to the
gross costs and losses.
7
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
3. Joint Guidelines on the estimation of
aggregated annual costs and losses
caused by major ICT-related incidents
Status of these Joint Guidelines
This document contains Joint Guidelines issued pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No
1093/20102; Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 3; and Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No
1095/20104 - ‘the ESAs’ Regulations’. In accordance with Article 16(3) of the respective ESAs’
Regulations, competent authorities and financial institutions must make every effort to comply
with the Guidelines.
Joint Guidelines set out the ESAs’ view of appropriate supervisory practices within the European
System of Financial Supervision or of how Union law should be applied in a particular area.
Competent authorities to whom the Joint Guidelines apply should comply by incorporating them
into their supervisory practices as appropriate (e.g. by amending their legal framework or their
supervisory processes), including where the Joint Guidelines are directed primarily at institutions.
Reporting Requirements
In accordance with Article 16(3) of the ESAs’ Regulations, competent authorities must notify the
respective ESA whether they comply or intend to comply with these Joint
Guidelines/Recommendations, or otherwise with reasons for non-compliance, by 19.05.2025. In
the absence of any notification by this deadline, competent authorities will be considered by the
respective ESA to be non-compliant. Notifications should be sent to compliance@eba.europa.eu,
compliance@eiopa.europa.eu and DORA@esma.europa.eu with the reference ‘JC/GL/2024/34’. A
template for notifications is available on the ESAs’ websites. Notifications should be submitted by
persons with appropriate authority to report compliance on behalf of their competent authorities.
Notifications will be published on the ESAs’ websites, in line with Article 16(3).
2 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC, (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p.12)
3 Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority), amending Decision
No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/79/EC, (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 48–83)
4 Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and
repealing Commission Decision 2009/77/EC, (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 84–119)
8
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Title I - Subject matter, scope, addressees, and definitions
Subject matter and Scope of application
1. These guidelines are aimed at fulfilling the mandate given to the ESAs under Article 11(11) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/25545, to develop common guidelines on the estimation of aggregated
annual costs and losses of major ICT-related incidents referred to Article 11(10) of that
Regulation. These guidelines also specify a common template for the submission of the
aggregated annual costs and losses.
Addressees
2. These guidelines are addressed to competent authorities as defined in Article 46 of Regulation
2022/2554 and to financial institutions as defined in Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 1093/2010,
Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 1094/2010 and Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 1095/2010 .
Definitions
3. Terms used and defined in Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 have the same meaning in these
guidelines.
Title II- Implementation
Date of application
4. These Guidelines apply from 19.05.2025.
5 Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on digital operational
resilience for the financial sector and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014,
(EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011, (OJ L 333, 27.12.2022, p. 1–79)
9
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Title III- Provisions on the estimation of aggregated annual costs
and losses of major ICT-related incidents
5. Financial entities should estimate the aggregate annual costs and losses of major ICT-related
incidents by aggregating the costs and losses for major ICT-related incidents that fall within the
reference year for which the competent authority requested the estimation. The financial
entity may choose whether the reference year should correspond to either the completed
calendar year, or to the completed accounting year of the financial entity for which the financial
entity has finalised its financial statements. Once a financial entity has decided whether it will
provide the estimation based on the calendar year or its accounting year, such a decision should
be applied to future estimations of aggregated annual costs and losses. The financial entity may
change that decision by notifying the competent authority, and provided that the competent
authority does not object within two months of receiving the notification. Financial entities
should not include costs and losses related to those incidents that fall before or after that
reference year.
6. Financial entities should include in the estimation all ICT-related incidents that, irrespective of
the reason, were classified as major in accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation [OJ
L, 2024/1772, 25.6.2024]6 on incident classification and
(a) for which the financial entity has submitted a final report in accordance with Article 19(4)(c)
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 in the relevant reference year, or
(b) any incident for which the financial entity submitted in previous reference years a final
report in accordance with Article 19(4)(c) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 that had a
quantifiable financial impact on the financial entity in the relevant reference year.
7. Financial entities should estimate the aggregated annual costs and losses by applying the follow
sequential steps:
(a) estimate the costs and losses of each major ICT-related incident as referred to in paragraph
6 individually. Those estimations should produce the gross costs and losses taking into
account the types of costs and losses as set out in Article 7(1) and (2) of the Commission
Delegated Regulation [OJ L, 2024/1772, 25.6.2024];
(b) for each major ICT-related incident, financial entities should also estimate the financial
recoveries as specified in Annex II to Commission Implementing Regulation [OJ L, 2025/302,
20.2.2025]7;
6Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2024/1772 of 13 March 2024 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for the
classification of ICT-related incidents and cyber threats, setting out materiality thresholds and specifying the details of
reports of major incidents [OJ L, 2024/1772, 25.6.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2024/1772/oj]
7 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2025/302 of 23 October 2024 laying down implementing technical standards
for the application of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the
10
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
(c) financial entities should aggregate the gross costs and losses and the financial recoveries
across major ICT-related incidents.
8. As basis for the estimations, financial entities should refer to the costs, losses and financial
recoveries that are reflected in their financial statements such as the profit and loss account,
or where applicable in their supervisory reporting, of the relevant reference year. In their
estimation, financial entities should also include accounting provisions that are reflected in
their financial statements such as the profit and loss account of the relevant reference year.
Where accurate data is not available, financial entities should base their estimation on other
available data and information to the extent possible.
9. Financial entities should include adjustments on the costs and losses of an estimation that it
submitted for a previous year in the estimation of the relevant reference year in which the
adjustments are made.
10. Financial entities should include in the report of their estimation of the aggregated annual costs
and losses also the breakdown of gross costs and losses and of financial recoveries for each
major ICT-related incident that were included in the aggregation.
11. Financial entities should use the template in the Annex to submit to the competent authority
the estimation of their aggregated annual costs and losses for the reference year. For each item
under paragraph 6 and 9 that is included in the estimation of the reference year, financial
entities should use the same incident reference codes provided by the financial entity as the
ones used in the final report in accordance with Article 19(4)(c) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
standard forms, templates, and procedures for financial entities to report a major ICT-related incident and to notify a
significant cyber threat [OJ L, 2025/302, 20.2.2025, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2025/302/oj]
11
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Annex: Reporting template for gross costs and losses and financial
recoveries in a reference year
Name of the financial entity
Legal Entity Identifier
Start and end date of the reference year of the
financial entity
Currency
Number of Date of the Incident Gross costs and losses Recoveries of the
incident submission of the reference of the incident in the incident in the
final incident report number reference year (1000s of reference year
units) (1000s of units)
1
2
…
Total for ----------- -----------
reference
year
12
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
4. Accompanying documents
4.1 Cost- Benefit Analysis / Impact Assessment
As per Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 (EBA Regulation), 1093/2010 (EIOPA
Regulation) and 1095/2010 (ESMA regulation), any guidelines and recommendations developed by
the ESAs shall be accompanied by an Impact Assessment (IA) which analyses ‘the potential related
costs and benefits’.
This analysis presents the IA of the main policy options included in this Consultation Paper (CP) on
Joint Guidelines (RTS) on the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major ICT-
related incidents.
A. Problem identification
According to Article 11 of the Regulation 2022/2554 (DORA), financial entities, other than
microenterprises, shall report to the competent authorities, upon their request, an estimation of
aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major ICT-related incidents.
The costs and losses can be measured in various ways and also may be estimated differently across
sectors and financial entities. Without further specifications, the data on costs and losses reported
by financial entities may be based on different methodologies and assumptions. These divergences
can lead to a lack of comparability of data across financial entities and would undermine the
usefulness of this information for the Competent Authorities with respect to their supervisory role.
B. Policy objectives
The general objective of the guidelines is to harmonise across sectors the estimation of the
aggregated annual costs and losses caused by major ICT-related incidents to be reported to the
CAs.
More specific objectives of the guidelines are to enable CAs to use the reported aggregated costs
and losses to improve their assessment of the efficiency of the ICT risk management framework of
financial entities.
C. Baseline scenario
The baseline scenario is the situation when the current definitions and taxonomy is kept, without
further changes or further harmonisation.
With the entry into force of DORA, financial entities must comply with Article 11 of DORA. The
above legal requirements form the baseline scenario of the impact assessment, i.e. the impact
caused by DORA is not assessed within this impact assessment, which focuses only on areas where
further specifications have been provided in the Guidelines.
13
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
The following aspects have been considered when developing the Guidelines.
Policy issue 1: Start and end dates for aggregating costs and losses
Options considered
Option A: CAs can specify start and end date, which may have to be calculated on other figures
than the profit and loss statements
Option B: Start and end date of accounting years, based on the profit and loss statement of that
accounting year
Option C: The financial entities can decide themselves whether they want to set the start and end
dates of the reference year according to the calendar year or according to their accounting year,
but they would need to stick to that decision.
Option A, whereby the CA is free to specify the start and end date for the estimation, allows the CA
to decide which period is most relevant for its purposes. The disadvantage of this approach is that
depending on the CA request, the financial entities will need to recalculate the costs for the
respective periods.
Option B would be to set the start and end date to be identical with the accounting year of the
financial entity. The advantage of this approach is that it would allow financial entities to base their
estimates on existing figures from the profit and loss statement. The reporting of costs on losses
based on the profit and loss statement will thus be the easiest to implement for the financial entity.
However, as some financial entities already calculate the figures for their operational risk
management based on the calendar year, this option would impose that these financial entities re-
calculate the figures for their accounting years, if that is not identical to the calendar year.
Option C would leverage on the most conveniently available data for financial entities as those that
have already an operational risk management framework in place can re-use the data from that.
Other financial entities that do not have such a framework in place could rely more on using their
accounting figures, which will be a source of information for all financial entities. As financial
entities should report consistently by calendar or accounting year over the years, this will ensure
that the figures will be coherent for each financial entity over time, since it will rely on a similar
established estimation methodology. As a result, in cases when data will be requested over several
years, the information provided will be comparable and consistent over time.
Considering the above arguments, Option C is the preferred one.
Policy issue 2: Granularity of reported data
Options considered
Option A: Aggregated data per year only
14
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Option B: Also report the breakdown of the data per year by incident
The mandate requires that financial entities report data on aggregated costs and losses, which
would justify Option A. While this option entails reporting of one datapoint per financial entity per
year, this figure may not be meaningful for the CA in case they would request the financial entities
to report their estimations, since it may hide information on incidents of various sizes and incidents
spanning over several years, for which the costs will be split across periods.
Option B, whereby costs and losses are reported at incident level, has several advantages:
- Costs and losses at incident level are more meaningful for the CA being reported separately
for each incident;
- In case of incidents spanning over multiple years, the CA would be able to reconstruct the
chain of losses from one single incident incurred over several periods.
Furthermore, Option B, despite requiring the reporting of disaggregated data, will not create
additional material burden, since the raw data will be estimated at incident level, and therefore will
already exist in a disaggregated form.
Option B is therefore preferred.
Cost and benefit analysis
Overall, the guidelines are expected to provide advantages to both financial entities and competent
authorities by clarifying the way aggregated costs and losses should be reported, without adding
any additional material burden.
Advantages Disadvantages
Clarity on the way data is
Financial entities None
estimated
Ensuring comparability of data
across sectors and Member
Competent authorities States None
Ensuring the data is meaningful
to the CA and usable
15
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
4.2 Feedback on the public consultation
The ESAs publicly consulted on the draft proposal contained in the Consultation paper.
The consultation period lasted for more than three months and ended on 4 March 2024. 70
responses were received.
This section presents a summary of the key points and other comments arising from the
consultation, the analysis and discussion triggered by these comments and the actions taken to
address them if deemed necessary. In many cases several industry bodies made similar comments
or the same body repeated its comments in the response to different questions. In such cases, the
comments, and ESAs’ analysis are included in the section of this paper where ESAs consider them
most appropriate.
Changes to the draft Guidelines have been incorporated as a result of the responses received during
the public consultation.
16
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Summary of the responses to the consultation and the ESAs’ analysis
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
Feedback on responses to question 1: Do you agree with paragraph 7 and 9 of the Guidelines on the assessment of gross and net costs and losses of major ICT-
related incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning and alternative approach(es) you would suggest.
Comments Several respondents raised issues that relate to The comments raised do not relate to the Guidelines but to the RTS No change.
relating to the on the classification of major ICT-related incidents (JC 2023 83) and
- the types of costs to be analysed, such as how to
RTS on major ICT- are consequently out of the scope of these Guidelines. The Guidelines
define/ specify them, or whether opportunity costs
related incident refer to these RTS in order to ensure consistency.
can be included in the types of costs, or whether
classification
indirect costs can be excluded, or to remove certain
types of costs and that there are too many types of
costs to assess,
- the approach to estimating these costs, such as
whether estimates are acceptable, or that only
external/exceptional costs should be considered,
- that the threshold of 100,000 EUR for the
economic impact criterion is too low, and
- that the ’economic impact’ should not be part of
the classification criterions.
Include either net Some respondents argued to only include the gross The gross costs are the costs or losses that the financial entity paid or Paragraph 7 point (b) and (c) have been amended as
or gross costs and costs while others argued to only include the net booked. The net costs are a simple subtraction of financial recoveries follows:
losses, not both. costs. The same applies to the reporting of the gross from the gross costs and losses. As such, the competent authorities
and net costs and losses and to the reporting can themselves calculate the net costs and losses. Consequently, the “b) for each major ICT-related incident, financial
template. ESAs have arrived at the view that the requirement to include and entities should also calculate the net costs and losses
report the net costs and losses can be deleted from the Guidelines to
by deducting from the estimated gross costs and
simplify the reporting requirements for financial entities. However,
losses estimate the financial recoveries as specified in
the estimate of the financial recoveries has been maintained in the
row 4.24 of the Annex II of the implementing
Guidelines, in addition to the gross costs and losses.
technical standards on to Commission Implementing
Regulation [OJ L, 2024/1772, 25.6.2024];
c) financial entities should aggregate the gross costs
and losses, and the financial recoveries and the net
costs and losses across major ICT-related incidents.”
17
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
Paragraph 10 has been amended as follows:
“ Financial entities should include in the report of
their estimation of the aggregated annual costs and
losses also the breakdown of gross and net costs and
losses and of financial recoveries for each major ICT-
related incident that were included in the
aggregation.”
The template in the annex has been amended to
delete the column “Net costs and losses of the
incident in the accounting year”
Adjustments to Several respondents asked to clarify how the The Guidelines require adjustments to be included in the following Paragraph 11 has been amended as follows:
previous reports adjustments are to be conducted, for instance when years so that annual reports do not need to be updated. Also, the
costs or losses are wrongly calculated and in the reports of following years will only need to be submitted if the „Financial entities should use the template in the
case of costs and losses which become quantifiable competent authority requests it. Also, paragraph 9 is clear that Annex to report submit to the competent authority
at a later time or if the financial entity wants to adjustments to reports of previous years should only be included in
the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses
update the annual report at a later point in time. the report of the year in which the adjustments are made.
their aggregated annual costs and losses for the
One respondent also suggested to include a column
The ESAs do not consider a separate column for the adjustments to reference year. For each item under paragraph 6 and
in the annex to track the adjustments.
be necessary. In case the economic impact of past incidents are
9 that is included in the estimation of the reference
One respondent argued that adjustments should adjusted during the following year(s), the FEs should have to include
year, financial entities should use the same incident
only be made for incidents that occurred in the year again the incidents in the breakdown for each major ICT-related
reference codes provided by the financial entity as
prior to the reference year as “tracking” the incident in their template (with the same incident reference numbers
incidents is burdensome. as the ones used the first time they have been reported), but the the ones used in the final report in accordance with
value of gross costs and losses/recoveries would be limited to the Article 19(4)(c) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.”
value of the adjustments. To make this clear, the ESAs have amended
paragraph 11. The ESAs have decided to clarify to which incident The Annex has been amended to include the Legal
reference code from the final incident report the FE should refer to
Entity Identifier (LEI) of the financial entity.
and also included in the Annex the LEI of the FEs to avoid any
misunderstanding and for CAs to be capable of reconciling all the
information provided across years.
Considering the proposal to limit the time horizon for how long an
entity should track an incident and include adjustments in the annual
18
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
report, the ESAs arrived at the view that one of the main advantages
of the annual report for competent authorities is to understand the
evolution of the costs and losses and financial recoveries over time.
Furthermore, Article 17(2) DORA requires the financial entities to
record all ICT-related incidents so such information should be
available in any case. Consequently, the ESAs have rejected the
proposal.
Estimating costs Some respondents argued that estimating costs for The ESAs do not agree with this assessment, as financial entities need No change.
by incidents is each incident individually is overly burdensome to be able to track the costs of the incidents in any case as they are
overly since in the financial statements the costs and losses supposed to be able to assess the economic impact in accordance
burdensome are already aggregated. with Article 18(1) point (f) DORA.
Estimation of Five respondents argued that several types of costs Since the Guidelines detail that the annual report represents an No change.
costs are difficult to estimate with reasonable accuracy estimation of costs and losses, the ESAs are of the view that the
and propose to allow determining the costs on a Guidelines are sufficiently clear that an estimation is sufficient. Being
best effort basis. more prescriptive may increase the burden for financial entities.
Three respondents asked for more guidance on the Details of the elements to take into account in costs and losses
estimation of costs and losses. estimations are given in Paragraph 7 of the GL, which also refers to
the RTS on classification. Paragraph 8 of the GL only specifies the
One respondent asked for further clarifications and
source of estimates.
examples on how the estimated costs have to be
reflected. Where accurate data is not available for the valuation of some types
of costs and losses, the financial entity should rely on estimated
One respondent pointed to a discrepancy between
values based on other available data and information to the extent
Art. 11(10-11) of DORA and Paragraph 8 of the GL:
possible.
DORA requires estimates, whereas the GL expects
financial entities to refer to the amounts that are
reflected in their financial statements such as the
profit and loss account.
Accuracy of the One respondent argued that a statement on the On the principle, the ESAs agree with the respondent that the annual The Annex has been amended to specify that
data accuracy of the data should be included, analogue aggregated report, which is an estimation, should not need to be monetary values have to be reported in 1000s of
to Article 8(1) point a)i) of the Draft RTS on major more precise than the final incident report, which are the actual units.
incident reporting under DORA which states that impact figures. However, the requirement from the ITS on major
“data points with the data type ‘Monetary’ shall be incident reports that the respondent refers to is not an alleviation of
reported using a minimum precision equivalent to reporting accuracy but merely a reporting standard to be able to
thousands of units”. interpret the figures uniformly. This means that the level of precision
of the figures is effectively different in dependency of the currency on
which the financial entity reports the figures.
19
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
Consequently, in view of the ESAs, there is no need to specify the level
of accuracy in the Guidelines as this will give CAs more flexibility in
setting the level of necessary accuracy, also in consideration of the
type of entity, its size and other relevant criteria. Nevertheless, to
avoid a misunderstanding when filling out the template, the template
has been amended to specify that monetary values have to be
reported in 1000s of units.
Group-level vs. Three respondents stated that in capital groups, Article 11(10) DORA requires the reporting at the level of the No change.
entity-level costs and losses are usually calculated at a group financial entity, not at group level.
reporting. level. Therefore, the Draft Guidelines should allow
for the estimates on costs and losses to be
calculated at a group level.
Cross-country One respondent asked more details how to reflect As the reporting should be done at the level of the financial entity, it No change.
incidents on major incident covering two or more countries. should include all costs and losses, irrespective where they
originated.
Feedback on responses to question 2: Do you agree with paragraphs 5, 6 and 8 of the Guidelines on the specification of the one-year period, the incidents to
include in the aggregation and the base of information for the estimation of the aggregated annual gross and net costs and losses of major ICT-related
incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning and alternative approach(es) you would suggest.
Allow for Several respondents argued to allow for reporting The ESAs’ initial proposal in the Consultation Paper aimed at limiting Paragraph 5 has been amended as follows:
estimation based by calendar year and based on supervisory reporting the reporting burden for financial entities, as many of them are not
on supervisory or internal risk management figures instead of subject to regular reporting requirements like credit institutions that “Financial entities should estimate the aggregate
reporting, the reporting by financial year and based on financial report on operational risks. These entities seem to overwhelmingly annual costs and losses of major ICT-related incidents
operational risk statements, because: support the possibility to base the estimations on accounting figures,
by aggregating the costs and losses for major ICT-
framework and for which it is necessary to stick to the accounting year.
- Financial accounts do not include the types of costs related incidents that fall within the reference period.
calendar year
that are listed in the RTS on classification while Nevertheless, the ESAs acknowledge that especially for credit The reference period should be the completed
operational risk losses do. institutions and other financial entities that have already established
accounting year for which the competent authority
an operational risk framework, it makes more sense to provide the
- Reporting requirements under the CRR operational requested the estimation. The financial entity may
reporting on already existing reporting of operational risk.
risk framework and DORA should be harmonized. choose whether the reference year should
Consequently, the ESAs have decided to amend the Guidelines to correspond to either the completed calendar year, or
- Asset managers already use annual cost estimates
allow financial entities to choose which reference year they intend to
for risk management purposes on a calendar year to the completed accounting year of the financial
use. However, once they have decided whether they will report based
basis. Reporting for the financial year would lead to entity for which the financial entity has finalised its
on the calendar year or the accounting year, financial entities should
an additional burden for them. financial statements. Once a financial entity has
also provide future annual reports on the same type of year. If a
20
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
financial entity wanted to change its decision, it should notify the decided whether it will provide the estimation based
- Nevertheless, other FEs support using the
competent authority, who would have a 2-month period to object to on the calendar year or its accounting year, such a
accounting year and financial statements, but
the change of decision. This approach to provide flexibility on which
request to specify that it is the accounting year of decision should be applied to future estimations of
year to use will make it simpler for financial entities to choose the
the FE, not of the CA. aggregated annual costs and losses. The financial
most appropriate and easily accessible data source they have. This
entity may change that decision by notifying the
will especially benefit financial entities that have such information
available via their supervisory reporting, for instance credit competent authority, and provided that the
institutions. competent authority does not object within two
months of receiving the notification. Financial entities
should not include costs and losses related to those
incidents that fall before or after that reference
period year.”
Paragraph 6 has been amended as follows:
“Financial entities should include in the estimation all
ICT-related incidents that, irrespective of the reason,
were classified as major in accordance with the
Commission Delegated Regulation [OJ L,
2024/1772, 25.6.2024] on incident classification
and
(a) for which the financial entity has submitted
a final report in accordance with Article
19(4)(c) Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 in the
relevant accounting reference year, or
(b) any incident for which the financial entity
submitted in previous accounting reference
years a final report in accordance with Article
19(4)(c) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 that
had a quantifiable financial impact on the
validated financial statements such as the
21
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
profit and loss account of the financial entity
in the relevant accounting reference year.”
Paragraph 8 has been amended as follows:
“As basis for the estimations, financial entities
should refer to the costs, losses and financial
recoveries that are reflected in their financial
statements such as the profit and loss account, or
where applicable in their supervisory reporting, of
the relevant accounting reference year, and that, if
legally required, are validated by an independent
entity. In their estimation, financial entities should
also include accounting provisions that are reflected
in their validated financial statements such as the
profit and loss account of the relevant accounting
reference year. Where accurate data is not available,
financial entities should base their estimation on
other available data and information to the extent
possible.”
Paragraph 9 has been amended as follows:
“ Financial entities should include adjustments on
the costs and losses reported in the aggregated
reporting of an estimation that it submitted for a
previous year in the reporting estimation of the
relevant accounting reference year in which the
adjustments are made.”
Definition of the One respondent asked whether the word "annual" Paragraph 5 of the GL says the reference period is the completed No change.
reference period should be understood as "calendar" or "fiscal" year. accounting year, which may also be known as the ‘fiscal’ or ‘financial’
year of the financial entity. It is already defined by the financial
Another respondent asked to clarify whether the
entities when submitting their annual accounts.
accounting year can be specified by the financial
entity or by the NCA. Setting the start and end date to be identical with the accounting year
of the financial entity creates the lowest administrative burden for
Two respondents said that internal financial
many financial entities, because financial entities can use their
accounting processes must be modified to meet the
22
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
reporting requirement and suggest to refer to the financial statements that cover exactly that period as a source of
general ledger. information for the estimation.
One respondent said that Paragraph 5 is unclear The last comment about an incident overlapping with several
(“The reference period should be the completed reference periods is addressed in paragraph 6(b).
accounting year for which the competent authority
requested the estimation”) in the case an incident
overlaps two accounting years.
Limiting the One respondent requested to include a maximum The ESAs are of the view that it is essential for competent authorities No change.
number of years number of 3 years backwards from the current for to be able to request the annual reports, where necessary, for several
for which the CA which the competent authority can request the years. The added value of the Guidelines is to provide the CA a view
can request the annual report. of the development of the costs and losses over time and thus draw
annual report. conclusions on the response and recovery actions of the FEs.
Given that financial entities shall report the annual costs and losses
to their competent authorities only upon the CAs’ request, it should
be already clear that the reporting is not automatic.
Frequency of One respondent asked to confirm that the annual Article 11(10) DORA allows CAs to request this report, it does not No change.
reporting report will only need to be submitted to the NCA require entities to provide this report even without being requested
upon its request and not automatically every year. by the CA. The frequency of the reporting will depend on the
supervisory needs and will be subject to the request from the CA.
Apply threshold Some respondents argued that not all major ICT- The ESAs disagree with this proposal as it would a) be contrary to the No change.
for inclusion of related incidents should be included: level one requirement to provide an aggregate overview of costs and
incidents and losses of major ICT-related incidents, which in the understanding of
Either a minimum threshold of the costs and losses
time-limit for the ESAs is independent of the reason of classification and b) reduce
should be included to disregard negligible costs and
costs and losses the informative value of the annual report. Furthermore, under this
losses and keep the reporting burden low, or only
proposal, financial entities will nevertheless need to estimate the
include ICT-related incidents that met the
costs and losses and only once they have done all the work they could
“economic impact criterion” in the process of being
establish whether to include the incidents or not. This would not
classified as “major”.
reduce the reporting burden for financial entities.
Furthermore, some respondents argued that only
Regarding the proposal to limit the time, this contradicts the logic of
include costs of incidents that occurred in the
the Guidelines to be able to understand the evolution of costs and
reporting year, and adjustments to incidents that
losses over time.
occurred the year before that reporting year.
Incidents from further in the past should not be
considered to limit how long an incident needs to be
“tracked”.
23
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
Independent Some respondents stated that paragraph 8 "(...) and The reason for this provision is to give a trusted and ideally Paragraph 5 has been amended as shown further
validation of that, if legally required, are validated by an independent source for costs and losses estimation. The phrase “if above in this feedback table.
financial independent entity" is unnecessary and confusing. legally required” is included to take into account the fact that some
statements As not all elements referred to by paragraph 7 are financial entities may not be subject to this requirement, while listed
reflected in financial statements, let alone companies usually are subject to that requirement. This does not
independent validation. This could also cause contradict accounting rules and does not impose a new requirement
additional, disproportionate costs of external to validate the financial statements. Also, no external validation of
validation of annual reports, especially given that the annual report on costs and losses itself is required.
only estimations are required by the Guidelines.
Nevertheless, the ESAs have decided to delete the reference and
One respondent asked whether the report on costs instead clarify in paragraph 5 of the Guidelines the reference year can
and losses needs external validation. be that completed accounting year of the financial entity for which
the financial entity has finalised its financial statements.
No financial Some respondents stated that the guidelines are The ESAs emphasize that the Guidelines do not introduce any changes As explained further above in this feedback table,
statements not consistent with accounting rules. If changes to to financial reporting or accounting rules. The financial statements the amendments to paragraph 8 of the Guidelines
reconciliation financial reporting are necessary, they should be and accounting merely serve as a source of information for the clarify this further.
determined under the framework of national estimation.
accounting legislation. Therefore, the proposal is
that FE provide prudent estimation of the
aggregated costs and losses of the incidents of the
past year, without reflecting them in the financial
statements.
Feedback on responses to question 3: Do you agree with paragraph 10 and 11 and the annex of the Guidelines on the reporting of annual costs and losses of
major ICT-related incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning and alternative approach(es) you would suggest.
Currency to use One respondent argued that the amounts to be If the official currency is not EUR, every costs should be indicated in No change.
in the report reported if both EUR and non-EUR currencies should local currency according to the principle already established in the
be taken into account. RTS on incident reporting.
Scope of the One respondent stated that there is no legal basis The ESAs disagree with this view. The RTS on classification of incidents No change.
template and for the additional report on costs per incident in Art. requires FEs to determine gross cost and losses to assess whether the
breakdown by 11(10) and (11) DORA. economic impact criterion has been met. Thereby, gross cost and
incident losses indicate the impact of the incident, not reflecting who is
Two respondents are of the view that the reporting
impacted. Furthermore, it requests reporting financial recoveries.
of required data fields is too burdensome. While
However, as explained further above, the ESAs have decided to delete
some respondents propose to focus reporting on
the requirement of reporting net costs and losses, as these can be
gross cost and losses others suggest to just report
simply calculated by CAs themselves.
aggregated net cost and losses.
24
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
As explained in the CP of the GL, the breakdown by incident is also
necessary to substantiate the aggregated figures.
Distinction of Some respondents suggested making a distinction in Incidents that do not trigger the economic impact criterion (100k Paragraph 6 has been amended as follows:
incidents, which the reporting template between incidents that have EUR) can still be classified as major due to other factors, and that does
triggered the triggered the economic impact criterion according not mean the incident is without an economic impact. As the annual “Financial entities should include in the estimation all
‘economic to the RTS on incident classification and those that report is non-public and the competent authority has in any case the ICT-related incidents that, irrespective of the reason,
impact’ criterion have not in order to avoid misrepresentation of the information via the final incident report on the criteria that led to the
were classified as major in accordance with the
financial entity’s risk profile and operational classification of the incident as ‘major’, the ESAs do not consider this
Commission Delegated Regulation [ OJ L,
resilience. additional reporting requirement to be necessary. Nevertheless, the
ESAs have decided to clarify paragraph 6. 2024/1772, 25.6.2024] on incident classification
and […]”
Reporting tool Four respondents suggested using an online In view of the ESAs, CAs can decide independently about the No change.
platform where FEs can report estimates and where application of the reporting requirements as well as about the
they can access previous reports. implementation of reporting platforms and methods in their
jurisdiction. In addition, the mandate of Article 11(10) DORAis about
the estimation of aggregated annual costs and losses, not about the
reporting conditions.
Feedback on responses to question 4: Any other comment
Purpose of the Six respondents questioned the benefit of reporting DORA sets out the legal mandate for the reporting of aggregated No change.
report aggregated annual cost and losses due to various annual cost and losses upon request by CAs in Article 11(10).
reasons: Data is only available long after the
incident; the reporting of incidents should just focus
on the impact on clients and customers and not on
FEs; data on cost and losses of major ICT-related
incident should already been submitted as part of
final incident reports under Article 19(4) (c) DORA.
Proportionality Three respondents stated that smaller financial The annual report should be an estimation and does not aim at being No change.
entities will not be able to make accurate fully accurate. Furthermore, smaller financial entities are less likely to
estimations of gross and net losses. The application be requested to provide such a report, both because the classification
of the principle of proportionality is based on of major ICT-related incidents already provides for proportionality,
incorrect assumptions, since smaller entities are given many criteria defined in the draft RTS on incident classification
more likely to classify an incident as major, due to are relative and criteria in absolute values are high. In addition, CAs
will request the reporting for the various types of financial entities
25
JOINT COMMITTEE GUIDELINES ON AGGREGATED ANNUAL COSTS AND LOSSES OF MAJOR ICT-RELATED INCIDENTS
Topic Summary of responses received ESAs’ analysis Proposed amendments to the GL
more Single Point of Failures and to fewer incident under their responsibility, in line with their general supervisory
mitigation measures practices, which is generally risk-based. Also, Article 11(10) DORA
exempts microenterprises from reporting annual costs and losses.
Reconciliation of One respondent stated that more clarity is needed The annual report is independent of the final incident reports given No change.
the annual report on whether financial entities will have to reconcile they will not be reported at the same time. The final incident reports
with final incident the content of the cost and losses reports with the will not need to be updated or adjusted. The annual report will also
report final incident reports. In particular, the Guidelines not need to be updated: adjustments only have to be included in the
should clarify whether financial entities will be annual cost and losses reports of the following year, in case the CA
expected to correct both the closed final incident requests that report, too.
report and cost and losses reports to make sure they
reconcile, in the event where additional recoveries
are made after submitting a final incident report.
Comments Several respondents raised comments that do not DORA mandates the reporting of the economic impact in the final
relating to the relate to the Guidelines themselves, but rather to incident report. This has to be provided in all cases, irrespective
final incident the obligation to submit a final incident report, such whether the ‘economic impact’ criterion has been met for
report as: classification of the incident as ‘major’.
- the costs and losses should only be provided in the The annual report is an additional requirement that only has to be
annual report, provided upon request of the competent authority and has no impact
on the submission and the content of the final incident report.
- The costs and losses cannot be provided within 30
days of the incident in the final incident report. The 30-day deadline is established in the ITS on incident reporting
according to Article 20 DORA. A deferred reporting of the costs and
losses to update the final incident report is not foreseen by DORA.
Comparable data Two respondents disagreed with the sentence on The ESAs are conscious of the fact that not all ICT major incidents are No change.
paragraph 11 in the rationale section of the CP, the same. The meaning of the paragraph 11 was mainly due to the
stating that “the ESAs are of the view that the fact that the GLs, since they aim to aggregate information for all major
figures for each major ICT-related incident need to ICT-related incidents of FE in the reporting period, need to take into
be comparable”. For the respondents this suggests account figures that are comparable as far as possible.
that all major incidents are similar, which is not the
case and the ESAs need to carefully consider what
exactly is being compared and to what effect.
26