Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation, exchange of information and coordination of
oversight activities of critical ICT third-party service providers located in the European Union and
the United Kingdom
between
The European Supervisory Authorities, namely:
the European Banking Authority,
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, and
the European Securities and Markets Authority
on the one part,
and
The UK Financial Authorities, namely:
the Bank of England,
the Prudential Regulation Authority, and
the Financial Conduct Authority on the other part,
Collectively the “Authorities” and individually an “Authority”.
1
Preamble
(1) The European Supervisory Authorities (“ESAs”) include the European Banking Authority (“EBA”)
established by Regulation (EU) No 1093/20101, the European Insurance and Occupational
Pensions Authority (“EIOPA”), established by Regulation (EU) No 1094/20102 and the European
Securities and Markets Authority (“ESMA”) established by Regulation (EU) No 1095/20103,
these three regulations being hereinafter collectively referred to as the “ESAs Regulations”.
(2) The United Kingdom financial Authorities (the “UK Financial Authorities”) include the Bank of
England (“BoE”), the Prudential Regulation Authority (“PRA”) and the Financial Conduct
Authority (“FCA”). Unless otherwise stated, references in this Memorandum of Understanding
(“MoU”) to the BoE do not include the BoE acting in its capacity as the PRA. References in this
MoU to the PRA are to the BoE in its capacity as the PRA.
(3) Regulation (EU) 2022/25544 (the “Digital Operational Resilience Act” or “DORA”) establishes a
comprehensive framework to ensure the digital operational resilience of financial entities within
the European Union (“EU”). This Regulation sets out requirements for financial entities with
regards to the management of information and communication technology (“ICT”) risks,
incident reporting, and third-party risk management, to safeguard the financial sector against
cyber threats and ICT disruptions.
(4) DORA attributes an oversight role to the ESAs over ICT third-party service providers designated
as critical to the European financial sector (“critical ICT third-party service providers” or
“CTPPs”). The oversight role is attributed to one of the ESAs for each CTPP under the name of
Lead Overseer.
(5) The UK has a corresponding, although distinct, regime under Part XVIII, Chapter 3C of the
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (“FSMA”), that establishes a framework for the
oversight by the UK Financial Authorities of critical third parties (“CTPs”) designated by HM
Treasury (the “UK CTP Regime”). In accordance with section 312L FSMA, HM Treasury may
designate any person who provides services to UK financial entities as a CTP if in HM Treasury’s
opinion a failure in, or disruption to, the provision of those services could threaten the stability
of, or confidence in, the UK financial system.
(6) FSMA attributes an oversight role to the UK Financial Authorities with respect to CTPs once
designated by HM Treasury. The UK Financial Authorities have issued substantively identical
rules for CTPs, a joint Supervisory Statement and expectations and other guidance outlining
1 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory
Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/78/EC (OJ L 331 of
15.12.2010, p.12).
2 Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory
Authority (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission
Decision 2009/79/EC (OJ L 331 of 15.12.2010, p.48).
3 Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory
Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/77/EC
(OJ L 331 of 15.12.2010, p.84)
4 Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the
financial sector and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011
(OJ L 333 of 27.12.2022, p.1).
2
their requirements and expectations for CTPs. These are set out in a November 2024 joint policy
statement (PRA PS16/24 and FCA PS24/165). Pursuant to FSMA, the UK Financial Authorities
share this role and are required to co-ordinate their functions. A Memorandum of
Understanding between the UK Financial Authorities dated October 20246 (as amended from
time to time) sets out in general terms the exercise of their functions in relation to CTPs and
how they intend to coordinate their functions. Under that Memorandum of Understanding the
UK Financial Authorities envisage that they may jointly agree that one of them may perform the
role of lead regulator for a designated CTP. The UK Financial Authorities are also each
responsible for the monitoring of third-party risk in the financial sector in respect of UK financial
entities under their supervision.
(7) This MoU lays down the principles as well as the purpose and scope of international cooperation
and exchange of information between the ESAs and the UK Financial Authorities, in relation to
the oversight of CTPPs and CTPs and in the context of monitoring of third-party risk in the
financial sector.
(8) Under the DORA oversight framework, the ESAs may exercise oversight powers towards CTPPs
by way of different examinations, such as requests for information, general investigations and
on-site inspections.
(9) In accordance with Article 31(12) of DORA, EU financial entities are only permitted to use the
services of a CTPP located outside of the EU (a “non-EU CTPP”) if such a CTPP has established
an EU subsidiary within 12 months of its designation. The EU subsidiary will serve as the primary
contact point and addressee of the ESAs’ oversight measures in relation to the non-EU CTPP. The
powers conferred to the Lead Overseer under Article 35(1) of DORA include information
requests addressed to the EU subsidiary and may concern any information related to the
provision of services to EU financial entities by the non-EU CTPP, irrespective of whether the
information sought to be obtained is stored within the EU or not.
(10) In the case of a non-EU CTPP, the ESAs will focus their oversight activities by addressing the EU
subsidiary of this CTPP, or any other of its EU subsidiaries. In the case where the ESAs cannot
attain their oversight objectives through the EU subsidiaries and wish to conduct an on-site
inspection at any CTPP premises located in the UK, the ESAs will coordinate their activities with
the UK by following the specifications laid down in this MoU.
(11) The UK Financial Authorities’ approach to the oversight of CTPs will comprise a range of
oversight activities including reviews of CTPs’ self-assessments (interim and annual) and
supporting documentation; regular and ad-hoc meetings with the CTP; deep dive and thematic
reviews (including skilled persons reports); use of powers, including information gathering and
referrals to enforcement; participation in incident management playbook exercises (including
any feedback provided to the CTP after the exercise); and consideration of incident reports and
follow-up actions. Some of these oversight activities may occasionally require on-site access by
the UK Financial Authorities, or persons appointed on their behalf (such as skilled persons), to
the EU subsidiary, or any other European subsidiaries of a CTP that is also designated as a CTPP
5 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2024/november/operational-resilience-
critical-third-parties-to-the-uk-financial-sector-policy-statement
6 Memorandum_of_Understanding_between_the_FCA_and_the_Bank_of_England-critical-third-party.pdf
3
by the ESAs. Where this is the case, the UK Financial Authorities will coordinate their activities
with the ESAs by following the specifications laid down in this MoU.
(12) Article 36(2) of DORA requires the ESAs to conclude administrative cooperation arrangements
with the relevant non-EU authorities to enable a smooth conduct of on-site inspections. Article
36(2) of DORA establishes the minimum scope of such cooperation arrangements. Such
arrangements may not create legal obligations in respect of the EU and its Member States, nor
prevent Member States and their competent authorities from concluding bilateral or
multilateral arrangements with those non-EU countries and their relevant authorities.
(13) Article 44(1) of DORA enables the ESAs to conclude administrative arrangements with non-EU
regulatory and supervisory authorities to foster international cooperation on ICT third-party risk
mitigation across different financial sectors, in particular by developing best practices for the
review of ICT risk management practices and controls, mitigation measures and incident
responses. Correspondingly, the UK Financial Authorities view cooperation with non-UK
authorities as a key part of the UK CTP Regime. This cooperation contributes to the effective
oversight of CTPs and promotes interoperability with other regimes aimed at managing systemic
risks to the financial system posed by third party service providers. This cooperation can also
reduce duplicative oversight of CTPs/CTPPs, and promote a more efficient use of resources by
the Authorities, other relevant authorities and CTPs/CTPPs.
(14) Under Article 49 of DORA, the ESAs have established a pan-European systemic cyber incident
coordination framework (“EU-SCICF”), with the objective of facilitating an EU-coordinated
response in case of major cyber incidents with a potential systemic impact. This
operational/strategic framework foresees the establishment of communication channels with
international stakeholders that will need to be defined and effectively structured within
cooperation agreements to allow for exchange of information.
(15) Likewise, under the UK CTP Regime, effective incident management is vital for ensuring that
CTPs manage potential systemic risks when responding to major incidents (referred to as CTP
operational incidents in the UK Financial Authorities’ rules). CTPs will be required to cooperate
with the UK Financial Authorities and affected UK financial entities to coordinate responses to
CTP operational incidents, including through Collective Incident Response Frameworks.
Strengthening communication and coordination between the UK Financial Authorities, the ESAs
and the various relevant incident coordination and response frameworks in the EU and UK
during CTP operational incidents and major ICT-related incidents with systemic and cross-border
impact is another key objective of this MoU.
(16) Effective cooperation relies on the possibility to share information freely and safely among
authorities, and this is facilitated by robust provisions on professional secrecy. The
confidentiality and professional secrecy regime applicable to the UK has been assessed by the
ESAs to be equivalent to the respective EU framework.
(17) Nothing in this MoU restricts or prevents the Authorities from sharing information to assist each
other in carrying out their functions as may be permitted by law, either under other Memoranda
of Understanding between the Authorities or otherwise.
4
(18) The Authorities intend to ensure an effective level of cooperation and exchange of information,
and, where appropriate, coordination of the ESAs’ oversight activities carried out under DORA
and the UK Financial Authorities’ oversight of CTPs under the UK CTP Regime, and for this
purpose have decided to enter into this MoU.
Article 1
Purpose and scope of cooperation
1. This MoU lays down the principles and key areas for cooperation and exchange of
information between the ESAs and the UK Financial Authorities, in relation to the
oversight of CTPPs under DORA and CTPs under the UK CTP Regime, including but not
limited to the coordination of the ESAs’ and UK Financial Authorities’ oversight activities
addressed at CTPPs owning, or using in any way, premises located in the UK for providing
services to EU financial entities, and CTPs owning, or using in any way, premises located
in the EU for providing services to UK financial entities. Such cooperation will assist the
Authorities to manage risks to the stability of, or confidence in, their respective financial
sectors.
2. This MoU also aims to foster cooperation and exchange of information including in
emergency situations, between the ESAs and the UK Financial Authorities on ICT third-
party risk across different financial sectors, in particular, with the aim of developing best
practices for the review of ICT risk management practices and controls, mitigation
measures and incident responses.
Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this MoU:
a) ‘Authority/ies’ means a signatory/ies to this MoU or any successor thereto.
b) “Books and Records” means documents, electronic media, and books and records
within the possession, custody and control of a CTPP or CTP.
c) “Collective Incident Response Framework” means any group involving UK financial
entities, the UK Financial Authorities or a combination thereof, whose purpose is
to facilitate a collective response to incidents that may adversely affect the UK’s
financial sector.
d) “Critical ICT third-party service provider” or “CTPP” means an ICT third-party
service provider designated as critical in accordance with Article 31 of DORA.
e) “Critical third party” or “CTP” means a critical third party designated by HM
Treasury under section 312L(1) of FSMA.
f) “EU financial entities” means the entities referred to in Article 2(1), points (a) to
(t), of DORA, which are located in the EU.
g) “ICT third-party service provider” means an undertaking providing information
and communication technology (“ICT”) services.
h) “Jurisdiction” means for the ESAs the EU and for the UK Financial Authorities the
UK.
5
i) “Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP” means a CTPP which has also been designated
as a CTP.
j) “On-site inspections” means the oversight activities, powers and proceedings
referred to in Article 39 of DORA where the ESAs enter into CTPP premises in the
UK or oversight tasks under FSMA, including information-gathering and
investigation, where a UK Authority enters into CTP premises in the EU.
k) “Onward sharing authority” means any authority listed in paragraph 1 of Appendix
B to this MoU.
l) “Oversight tasks” means work, activities or actions conducted by, in the case of the
EU, the Lead Overseer and its designated staff in order to achieve the objectives set
out in Article 33 of DORA, including the exercise of powers referred to in Article 35
of DORA; and in the case of the UK, the UK Financial Authorities under their
functions in relation to CTPs in accordance with Part XVIII, Chapter 3C of FSMA.
m) “Secure Electronic Means” means electronic methods of communications that
ensure that completeness, integrity and confidentiality of information are
maintained during transmission.
n) “Traffic Light Protocol” or “TLP” means the categorisation of information according
to four labels each related to sensitiveness and indicating the sharing limitations to
be applied by the recipients: TLP:RED, TLP:AMBER, TLP:GREEN, and TLP:CLEAR7.
o) “UK financial entities” means authorised persons, relevant service providers or
FMI entities as referred to in section 312L(1) FSMA.
Article 3
General principles for cooperation and exchange of information
1. For Mutually Designated CTPs/CTPPs, each Authority will use best endeavours to provide
the Authorities of the other jurisdiction, on a timely basis upon request or on its own
initiative, where appropriate and insofar as legally possible and operationally feasible,
with any information that is, in the Authority’s reasonable view, material to the exercise
of the other Authorities’ oversight tasks. For CTPs/CTPPs which are not mutually
designated, each Authority may provide, where appropriate and insofar as legally possible
and operationally feasible, material information to the Authorities of the other
jurisdiction—either upon request or proactively—to support the other Authorities’
oversight tasks.
2. Where necessary, the Authorities will reasonably assist the other jurisdiction’s Authorities
in interpreting such information so as to enable them to assess compliance with the laws
or regulations to which the CTPs/CTPPs are subject.
3. Each Authority will endeavour to provide the Authorities of the other jurisdiction, insofar
as practicable and as permitted by law, regulation or other requirements, with assistance
in engaging with non-cooperative Mutually Designated CTPs/CTPPs headquartered in the
EU or UK. Any relevant assistance will be without prejudice to the ability of each Authority
to exercise its respective legal powers or employ other methods, if necessary, to address
7 In the case of disclosures by the UK Financial Authorities, “TLP: CLEAR” may be labelled as “TLP: BLUE”.
6
non-cooperation by a CTP/CTPP subject to its oversight, in line with Article 11 (Legal
Nature).
Article 4
Mechanisms for the transmission of any relevant information
1. The exchange of information between the Authorities referenced in Article 3 (General
principles for cooperation and exchange of information) is primarily intended to be
conducted in writing by Secure Electronic Means.
2. The Authorities intend to use the ESAs’ oversight collaboration tool, where mutually
agreed, for such exchanges of information. The ESAs’ oversight collaboration tool is a
dedicated Secure Electronic Means provided by the ESAs for the communication and
exchange of information for each of the Authorities’ oversight tasks under this MoU and
which presents technical information security measures to guarantee the confidentiality
of data against unauthorised access. Where the ESAs’ oversight collaboration tool is not
available or agreed, other Secure Electronic Means including encrypted email will be
used. In urgent situations, requests may be made orally, provided that they are
subsequently confirmed in writing by Secure Electronic Means, and provided such oral
communication is restricted to necessary recipients.
3. To enhance the quality of co-operation and assistance, the Authorities may convene ad
hoc meetings to discuss material issues of common concern in relation to CTPs/CTPPs and
coordinate actions, if deemed appropriate.
4. Both the request for exchange of information and the communication of the requested
information will be addressed to the designated contact persons as set forth in Appendix
A unless otherwise agreed to by the Authorities.
5. In requesting an exchange of information, the Authorities should clarify at least the
following:
a) the information sought by the requesting Authority;
b) a concise description of the facts underlying the request;
c) the purpose for which the information is sought;
d) the reasons why the information is relevant for the proper performance of the
requesting Authority’s tasks;
e) the time limit within which the information is to be provided and, where
appropriate, the urgency thereof; and
f) to whom, if anyone, including any governmental entity, onward disclosure of
information is likely to be necessary and the reasons for any such disclosure.
6. Information and documentation shared should adhere to the TLP categorisation. In cases
where no label is specified, the information will be treated as confidential. The Authorities
7
that are parties to this MoU agree to primarily handle information according to the TLP
categorisation. The Authorities, where appropriate, seek to categorise information based
on the categorised TLP sensitivity level assigned by the originating Authority. The
adoption of TLP as a framework for information sharing should not preclude the
application of the security procedures delineated in each of the internal classification
policies of the Authorities to this MoU.
7. Where a request for exchange of information cannot be fulfilled or the information
requested is not available, the Authority that has received that request will endeavour to
provide the reasons for not sharing the information.
Article 5
Procedures for the coordination of on-site inspections by the ESAs
1. The ESAs may seek to conduct on-site inspections of CTPPs on any premises located in the
UK, which are owned or used by such CTPPs in any way for the purposes of providing
services to EU financial entities, when the ESAs’ oversight objectives cannot be attained
by means of interacting with the relevant subsidiary located within the EU or other EU
subsidiaries, or by exercising oversight activities on premises located in the EU.
2. The conduct of on-site inspections by the ESAs referred to in paragraph 1 is subject to all
of the following conditions in accordance with Article 36(1), second subparagraph of
DORA:
a) the conduct of the inspection in the UK is deemed necessary by the ESAs to allow
it to fully and effectively perform its oversight duties in line with DORA;
b) the inspection in the UK is directly related to the provision of ICT services to EU
financial entities;
c) the relevant CTPP consents to the conduct of the inspection in the UK; and
d) the relevant UK Authority has been officially notified by the ESAs and raised no
objection thereto.
3. For any Mutually Designated CTPs/CTPPs, the UK Financial Authorities will endeavour to
assist the ESAs, where consent of the relevant CTPP to the on-site inspection has been
obtained by the ESAs, as far as practicable with the conduct of on-site inspections of
CTPPs including notifying the ESAs of their non-objection, if appropriate.
4. For any CTPPs which have not also been designated as CTPs in the UK, the UK Financial
Authorities will not be a relevant authority for the purposes of the ESA’s notification under
Article 36(1)(b)(iv) of DORA. Any response, or lack of response, by a UK Financial Authority
to a communication regarding a CTPP which has not been designated as a CTP in the UK
will not be considered as objection or non-objection for this purpose. The UK Financial
Authorities will endeavour to provide the ESAs with the contact details of the appropriate
UK authority within a reasonable time, or advise if no such authority exists.
8
5. For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, the UK Financial Authorities will provide the
ESAs with a list of relevant UK non-financial authorities which to the best of their
knowledge could constitute the relevant contacts.
6. Once the relevant alternative UK authority is identified, the ESAs will be responsible for
coordinating bilaterally with these relevant alternative UK authorities.
7. The ESAs will duly notify the UK Financial Authorities of any plans to conduct on-site
inspections as soon as practicable and in any event no later than three weeks before the
initiation of the inspection or investigation, and at least six weeks in advance for a non-
urgent inspection or investigation. This notification will detail to the best of the ESAs’
knowledge:
a) the name and other relevant information of the CTPP subject to the inspection;
b) the legal basis, including the relevant decision ordering the inspection;
c) the scope, subject matter and purpose of the inspection;
d) the expected starting and ending dates of the inspection; and
e) the names and contact details of the designated individuals who will take part in
the inspection.
8. When the ESAs notify the UK Financial Authorities of an on-site inspection of a Mutually
Designated CTP/CTPP and the consent of the relevant CTPP to the on-site inspection has
been obtained, the UK Financial Authorities will endeavour to cooperate with the ESAs in
relation to the execution of the inspection. The ESAs will act in accordance with the
following procedure before conducting such an on-site inspection:
a) To the extent not already provided under paragraph 7, the ESAs will inform the UK
Financial Authorities on the intended timeframe for, the scope, subject matter and
purpose of the on-site inspection.
b) When establishing the subject matter of an on-site inspection, the ESAs will
consider the monitoring or supervisory activities of the UK Financial Authorities
and will consider any information or documentation that was made available or is
capable of being made available by the UK Financial Authorities.
c) The UK Financial Authorities will endeavour to respond promptly to the ESAs
notification of intention to conduct an on-site inspection. Where practicable, the
UK Financial Authorities will, within 15 business days, acknowledge receipt of the
ESAs notification and indicate the timeframe for providing the response if it cannot
be given within that period. Where the UK Financial Authorities do not
communicate a response to the notification within 15 business days, the ESAs may
deem this as a non-objection to the on-site inspection. For the purpose of the UK
Financial Authorities’ non-objection, the UK Financial Authorities will inform the
ESAs which UK Financial Authority will be responsible for notifying the non-
objection to the ESAs’ on-site inspection on a case by case basis.
d) When requested by the ESAs and agreed with the UK Financial Authorities, the UK
Financial Authorities may assist with the review of the contents of public or non-
9
public Books and Records, including documents and electronic data, and
information obtained from management and staff of the CTPP, where applicable.
9. On conclusion of the on-site inspection, the relevant ESA performing such activities may
present the UK Financial Authorities with their findings within a reasonable timeframe.
The above-mentioned information will be given insofar as possible and subject to
applicable laws and regulations, and in line with the principles set out in this MoU.
Article 6
Procedures for the coordination of on-site inspections by the UK Financial Authorities
1. The UK Financial Authorities may seek to conduct on-site inspections, or other oversight
activities requiring on-site access, of CTPs on any premises located in the EU, which are
owned or used by such CTPs in any way for the purposes of providing services to UK
financial entities, when their oversight objectives cannot be attained by exercising
oversight activities on premises located in the UK.
2. For any Mutually Designated CTPs/CTPPs, the ESAs will endeavour to assist the UK
Financial Authorities, as far as practicable, with the conduct of on-site inspections in the
EU. Such assistance will also include assistance to any third party commissioned by the
UK Financial Authorities, where such person is covered by the UK’s professional secrecy
regime, including persons appointed by the UK Financial Authorities under Part XI
(Information Gathering and Investigations) of FSMA, such as skilled persons under section
166 of FSMA.
3. For any CTPs which have not also been designated as CTPPs in the EU, the ESAs will
endeavour to provide the requesting UK Financial Authority with the contact details of
the relevant financial or non-financial authority in the EU, or advise if no such authority
exists.
4. For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, the ESAs will provide the UK Financial
Authorities with a list of relevant financial or non-financial authorities in the EU which to
the best of their knowledge could constitute the relevant contacts.
5. Once a relevant EU financial or non-financial authority is identified, the UK Financial
Authorities will be responsible for coordinating bilaterally with the relevant EU financial
or non-financial authority.
6. The UK Financial Authorities will duly notify the ESAs of any plans to conduct on-site
inspections as soon as practicable and in any event no later than three weeks before the
initiation of the inspection or investigation, and at least six weeks in advance for a non-
urgent inspection or investigation. This notification will detail to the best of the UK
Financial Authorities’ knowledge:
a) the name and other relevant information of the CTP subject to the inspection;
b) the legal basis, including the relevant decision ordering the inspection;
c) the scope, subject matter and purpose of the inspection;
d) whether the CTP has consented to the inspection;
10
e) the expected starting and ending dates of the inspection; and
f) the names and contact details of the designated individuals who will take part in
the inspection.
7. When the UK Financial Authorities notify the ESAs of an on-site inspection of a Mutually
Designated CTP/CTPP, the ESAs will endeavour to cooperate with the UK Financial
Authorities in relation to the execution of the inspection. The UK Financial Authorities will
act in accordance with the following procedure before conducting such an on-site
inspection:
a) To the extent not already provided under paragraph 6, the UK Financial Authorities
will inform the ESAs on the intended timeframe for, the scope, subject matter and
purpose of the on-site inspection.
b) When establishing the subject matter of an on-site inspection, the UK Financial
Authorities will consider the oversight activities of the ESAs and will consider any
information or documentation that was made available or is capable of being made
available by the ESAs.
c) The ESAs will endeavour to respond promptly to the UK Financial Authorities’
notification of intention to conduct an on-site inspection. Where practicable, the
ESAs will, within 15 business days, acknowledge receipt of the UK Financial
Authorities’ notification.
d) When requested by the UK Financial Authorities and agreed with the ESAs, the ESAs
may assist with the review of the contents of public or non-public Books and
Records, including documents and electronic data, and information obtained from
management and staff of the CTP, where applicable.
8. On conclusion of the on-site inspection, the relevant UK Financial Authority performing
such activities may present the ESAs with their findings within a reasonable timeframe.
The above-mentioned information will be given insofar as possible and subject to
applicable laws and regulations, and in line with the principles set out in this MoU.
Article 7
Mechanism for notification in cases of infringement or non-compliance by Mutually Designated
CTPs/CTPPs
1. If a UK Financial Authority deems that a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP has infringed the
requirements to which it is obliged to adhere pursuant to applicable UK law when
providing services to financial institutions in the UK, it will notify the ESAs in accordance
with paragraph 3.
2. If an ESA deems that a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP has not complied with ESAs
oversight measures in accordance with Article 35(1) of DORA, or deems that a Mutually
Designated CTP/CTPP has infringed the requirements to which it is obliged to adhere
pursuant to applicable EU law when providing services to financial institutions in the EU,
it will notify the UK Financial Authorities in accordance with paragraph 4.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1:
11
a) a UK Financial Authority should notify the ESAs promptly once it has decided to
appoint investigators under section 168(5) FSMA to conduct an investigation into a
potential contravention by a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP of a requirement
imposed upon it under Chapter 3C (Critical Third Parties) of Part XVIII of FSMA; and
b) upon the conclusion of that investigation, the notifying UK Financial Authority
should promptly notify the ESAs its decision whether to impose sanctions under
section 312Q (Power of Censure) or section 312R (Disciplinary Measures) FSMA on
the Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 2, an ESA should notify the UK Financial Authorities
promptly where:
a) a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP is not following a recommendation addressed to
it by the Lead Overseer or has not declared its intention to follow such
recommendation, and where the Lead Overseer, pursuant to Article 42(1) of DORA,
has informed the relevant EU competent authorities accordingly;
b) the Lead Overseer has adopted a decision imposing a periodic penalty payment in
accordance with Article 35(6) of DORA; or
c) the Lead Overseer has issued a public disclosure in accordance with Article 42(2) of
DORA.
5. The notification should include at least the following elements if they are available at the
time of notification, and the notifying Authority should provide any remaining elements
as soon as possible:
a) the nature of the alleged infringement or non-compliance;
b) the timing of the investigation or other action by the Authority concerned,
including any applicable period of hearing the CTP/CTPP; and
c) any other information it considers relevant in connection with the alleged
infringement or non-compliance.
6. Following a recommendation of the Lead Overseer, as referred to in paragraph 4, and
subject to the consent from relevant EU competent authorities, the ESAs will share
information, as soon as practicable, in relation to an EU competent authorities’ decisions
addressed at financial entities, to temporarily suspend, either in part or completely, the
use or deployment of a service provided by a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP or to
terminate, in part or completely, the relevant contractual arrangements concluded with
a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP in accordance with Article 42(6) of DORA.
7. The UK Financial Authorities will accordingly use best endeavours to notify the ESAs in
advance of any decision on their part that would have an equivalent effect to a partial or
complete suspension of use or deployment of a service or partial or complete termination
of contractual arrangements referred to in paragraph 6.
8. The Authorities will also inform each other, as appropriate, if they are aware of any failure
by a Mutually Designated CTP/CTPP to cooperate effectively with the Authorities.
12
9. Where, after providing a notification, the notifying Authority becomes aware of the
submission of a remedial plan, the notifying Authority will share relevant details of such
plan with the Authorities of the other jurisdiction or inform such other Authorities as soon
as practicable.
10. Where, after providing a notification pursuant to the above provisions, the notifying
Authority becomes aware that the alleged infringement or non-compliance does not
materialise, or makes a finding to this effect, or elects to discontinue its investigation into
the alleged infringement or non-compliance, the notifying Authority will share relevant
details of this with the Authorities of the other jurisdiction as soon as practicable.
Article 8
Oversight methodologies and topics of common interest
1. The Authorities endeavour to cooperate in establishing mechanisms to share effective
practices or relevant methodologies relevant to the oversight of CTPPs and CTPs.
2. The Authorities further endeavour to exchange views on emerging technologies and
topics of common interest, as deemed relevant by them.
Article 9
Updates on regulatory or supervisory developments on the monitoring of ICT third-party risk of
financial sector entities in the UK and EU
1. The Authorities, where appropriate, intend to share information regarding ICT third-party
risk across the different financial sectors in their respective jurisdictions that is likely to be
of assistance to them for their oversight of CTPs/CTPPs, in order to promote the safe and
sound operation of major ICT third-party service providers and develop best practices for
the review of ICT risk management practices and controls, mitigation measures and
incident responses.
2. In particular, the Authorities may exchange information in circumstances where issues of
regulatory, supervisory or enforcement concern may arise and are relevant to their
respective oversight of CTPs/CTPPs, including but not limited to:
a) relevant oversight activities, such as planned on-site inspections, included in the
annual oversight plan for a CTPP or for the CTP in the year ahead;
b) relevant material oversight activities not scheduled in advance;
c) supervisory assessments of compliance and monitoring of the ongoing compliance
by CTPPs or CTPs with legal and regulatory requirements;
d) regulatory, supervisory or enforcement actions or approvals taken by the
Authorities or notified to the Authorities with prior consent, in relation to the
oversight of CTPPs or CTPs;
13
e) planned changes to the relevant obligations and requirements to which CTPPs or
CTPs are subject.
3. Exchanges of information under paragraphs 1 and 2 will take place in accordance with
Article 4 (Mechanisms for the transmission of any relevant information).
4. This MoU is without prejudice to the Authorities’ pre-existing ability to transmit updates
on regulatory or supervisory developments on the monitoring of ICT third-party risk of
financial institutions. The Authorities envisage that discussions on ICT third-party risk will
also continue under separate cooperation agreements and between teams which are not
directly involved in CTP/CTPP oversight.
Article 10
Cooperation in relation to emergency situations
1. The Authorities will use best endeavours to:
a) inform each other promptly if they become aware of an emerging or existing
emergency situation in relation to a CTP or CTPP including, but not limited to:
i. significant disruption at a CTP or CTPP, which might have an adverse impact
on EU financial entities or UK financial entities, including but not limited to a
CTP operational incident under the UK Financial Authorities’ rules or a major
ICT-related incident with systemic impact; and
ii. serious legal, regulatory, operational or financial difficulties of a CTP or CTPP
which might have an adverse impact on EU financial entities or UK financial
entities;
b) exchange information relating to the emergency situation, including but not limited
to reports of CTP operational incidents under the UK Financial Authorities’ rules or
summaries or extracts thereof, and any relevant incident information obtained
from CTPPs;
c) where appropriate, seek coordinated responses to any existing or emerging crisis
involving a CTP or CTPP in their respective jurisdictions, in accordance with the
applicable legislation and without prejudice to their respective involvement in the
relevant cross-border cooperation fora;
d) where appropriate, collaborate with financial sector incident response frameworks
in their respective jurisdictions; and
e) identify and share lessons learnt from relevant emergency situations.
2. Where appropriate, the Authorities may agree to take part in joint oversight activities aimed
at improving the ability of CTPs, CTPPs or the wider financial sector to respond to and recover
from major disruption, including but not limited to observing incident management playbook
exercises of CTPs.
14
Article 11
Legal nature
1. This MoU is a statement of intent to consult, cooperate, exchange information and
coordinate activities in connection with the Authorities’ supervisory/oversight
competences as regards the ongoing compliance by CTPPs and CTPs with the applicable
requirements to which they are subject in their jurisdictions, as well as with the
Authorities’ monitoring of related regulatory or supervisory developments.
2. The cooperation and information sharing arrangements under this MoU should be
interpreted and implemented in a manner that is permitted by and consistent with, the
laws and other legal or regulatory requirements applicable to each Authority.
3. This MoU does not create any legally binding obligations, confer any rights or supersede
any domestic or EU laws. This MoU does not confer upon any person the right or ability,
directly or indirectly, to obtain, suppress or exclude any information or to challenge the
execution of a request for assistance under this MoU.
4. This MoU is not intended to limit or condition the discretion of an Authority in any way in
the discharge of its regulatory or supervisory responsibilities or to prejudice or affect in
any way the individual responsibilities, competencies or autonomy of any Authority. This
MoU does not limit an Authority to taking solely those measures described herein in
fulfilment of its responsibilities and mandates. In particular, this MoU does not affect any
right of any Authority to communicate with or obtain information or documents from any
person subject to its oversight or supervision that is located in the territory of the other
Authority.
5. The Authorities should, within the framework of this MoU, provide each other with the
fullest cooperation permissible under their laws and regulations in relation to their
respective oversight competencies in relation to CTPPs or CTPs, as well as to the
monitoring of related regulatory and supervisory developments in each of their
respective jurisdictions.
6. Following consultation, cooperation may be denied:
a) where the cooperation would require an Authority to act in a manner that would
violate laws and regulations applicable to it; or
b) where the cooperation would be unduly burdensome; or
c) on the grounds of UK public interest for UK Financial Authorities or of European
public interest for the ESAs.
7. The Authorities represent that, as of the date of this MoU, no domestic or EU laws or
regulations should prevent them from providing assistance of the nature provided for in
this MoU to one another.
15
8. The Authorities will endeavour to reach an understanding on the interpretation and
application of this MoU. Where the Authorities encounter material differences of views
related to the interpretation of a provision of this MoU, they should endeavour to make
good faith efforts, through cooperation, consultations and discussions, to resolve such
differences in order to reach a mutually acceptable resolution of the issues raised.
9. To facilitate communication and cooperation under this MoU, the Authorities hereby
designate contact persons as set forth in the Appendix A. Any modifications to the details
of contact persons should be communicated without undue delay to the other
Authorities.
Article 12
Confidentiality and permissible uses of information
1. The Authorities acknowledge that all information exchanged on the basis of this MoU may
be confidential information within the meaning of the legal framework applicable to the
Authorities. The Authorities acknowledge that all information exchanged on the basis of
this MoU shall be treated as if it is confidential unless otherwise agreed in writing.
2. The Authorities will preserve the confidentiality of the information received as far as
legally possible, except as provided in this MoU or pursuant to a legally enforceable
demand. Any confidential information received by the Authorities under this MoU will be
used exclusively by the relevant Authorities for the exercise of their functions, including
their functions in relation to CTPPs or CTPs and will not be disclosed to third parties except
as set out below.
3. Each Authority will ensure that all persons that deal with or have access to confidential
information provided by the other Authority (including any of its staff, members of its
governance bodies, external providers and any persons who perform tasks on behalf of
such Authority that have access to confidential information) are bound by the obligations
of confidentiality and professional secrecy in compliance with the applicable legal
framework, including after the termination of their duties.
4. Except as provided in paragraphs 5 and 6, before any Authority that has received
confidential information under this MoU (a “receiving Authority”) discloses any
confidential information, categorised as TLP:AMBER or TLP:RED, received from another
Authority to a third party, the receiving Authority will request and obtain prior written
consent, which will not be unreasonably withheld, from the Authority that provided the
information. Before disclosing the confidential information to such a third party (including
in a situation provided for in paragraph 5), the receiving Authority will obtain a
commitment from that party that information will be kept confidential. During an
emergency situation, consent may be obtained in any form, including orally, provided
such communication is confirmed in writing as promptly as possible.
5. If the receiving Authority is legally required to disclose confidential information received
under this MoU to a third party, it will, to the extent permitted by law, inform the
Authority that provided the information about such possible onward sharing, including
the purposes for which the information is going to be shared, the uses that the third party
16
could make of the information and the safeguards that the third party would put in place
to ensure the confidentiality of the information. If the Authority that provided the
information under this MoU does not consent to the disclosure to a third party, then the
receiving Authority will take reasonable steps to resist disclosure, including by employing
legal means to challenge the request for disclosure or by advising the third party of the
possible negative consequences that such disclosure might have on the future exchange
of confidential information between the Authorities.
6. Subject to the conditions set out in Appendix B, where either an ESA or a UK Financial
Authority transmits information received to an onward sharing authority, it will notify the
Authority which provided the information, ideally before the transmission of the
information and, at the latest, within 15 days from such transmission.
7. The Authorities intend that the sharing or disclosure of confidential information, including
deliberative and consultative materials, pursuant to the terms of this MoU, will not
constitute a waiver of privilege or confidentiality of such information.
Article 13
Processing of Confidential Information
1. The Authorities represent and acknowledge that under the terms of this MoU:
a) the ESAs process confidential information in accordance with the relevant
provisions of EU law, including the ESAs Regulations, and internal requirements on
confidentiality and professional secrecy;
b) The UK Financial Authorities process confidential information in accordance with
the relevant provisions of UK law, including FSMA, and internal requirements on
confidentiality and professional secrecy.
Article 14
Data Protection
1. The Authorities would process personal data for which they are controllers in accordance
with the applicable data protection laws and regulations. The ESAs would process the
personal data in line with Regulation 2018/1725 (EUDPR).
2. The transfers of personal data between ESAs and the UK Financial Authorities would be
based, for the ESAs, on Chapter V of Regulation 2018/1725 (EUDPR).
3. The UK Financial Authorities would process personal data in accordance with data
protection and privacy legislation (including subordinate legislation) in force from time to
time in the UK, including but not limited to the assimilated law version of the General
Data Protection Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (UK GDPR) and the Data Protection Act 2018.
Accordingly, for the UK Financial Authorities, transfers of personal data between the UK
and ESAs would be conducted in accordance with Chapter V of the UK GDPR.
17
Article 15
Successor authorities
1. Where the relevant functions of an Authority are transferred or assigned to another
authority or authorities, the terms of this MoU shall apply to the successor authority or
authorities performing those relevant functions, such successor authority or authorities
shall become a signatory or signatories to this MoU without the need for any further
amendment to this MoU, and notice will be provided to the other Authorities.
2. This will not affect the right of any Authority to give written notice as provided in Article
17 (Termination) that it no longer wishes to be a signatory to this MoU if it wishes to do
so.
Article 16
Amendments
1. The Authorities intend to periodically review the functioning and effectiveness of this
MoU between the Authorities, including in consideration of changes in the regulatory
status or supervisory treatment of CTPPs or CTPs in the relevant regulatory or supervisory
regime in either jurisdiction.
2. This MoU may be amended with the written consent of all Authorities. By derogation from
the need to obtain written consent from all Authorities, amendments to the relevant
contact point listed in Appendix A can be made by each Authority giving written notice to
the other Authorities.
Article 17
Termination
1. This MoU will remain operative, unless terminated, for an unlimited period of time.
2. If an Authority wishes to no longer be a signatory to this MoU, it shall provide 30 calendar
days prior written notice to the other Authorities.
3. If an Authority gives such notice, the parties will consult concerning the disposition of any
pending requests for information or assistance. If an agreement cannot be reached
through consultation, cooperation will continue with respect to all requests for
information or assistance that were made under this MoU before the expiration of the
30-day period until all requests are fulfilled or the requesting Authority withdraws such
request(s).
4. In the event of termination of this MoU, any confidential information obtained under this
MoU will continue to be treated in the manner described under Article 12 (Confidentiality
and permissible uses of information).
18
Article 18
Publication
1. This MoU may be made publicly available in full or in part by any of the Authorities at any
time and in any manner.
Article 19
Entry into operation
1. This MoU will come into effect at the latest of the dates on which this MoU is signed by
the Authorities.
19
Executed by the Authorities.
For the European Banking Authority For the European Insurance and Occupational
Pensions Authority
Jose Manuel Campa, Chairperson
Petra Hielkema, Chairperson
For the European Securities and Markets
Authority
Verena Ross, Chair
For the Bank of England For the Financial Conduct Authority
Sarah Breeden, Deputy Governor for Financial Nikhil Rathi, Chief Executive
Stability
For the Prudential Regulation Authority
Sam Woods, Chief Executive
20
Appendix A
Contact Persons (redacted)
21
Appendix B
Onward sharing Authorities
1. List of Onward Sharing Authorities
For the purposes of Article 12(6) of this MoU, “onward sharing authorities” means any of the
authorities listed below, when fulfilling the conditions which are set out in paragraph 2 of this
Appendix:
EU Authorities
a) competent authorities referred to in Article 46 of DORA;
b) the EBA, ESMA, EIOPA, and the European Systemic Risk Board (“ESRB”);
c) resolution authorities referred to in Article 2(1), point 18 of Directive 2014/59/EU8; and
d) competent authorities, single points of contact and the computer security incident
response teams (“CSIRTs”) designated or established in accordance with Directive (EU)
2022/25559.
UK Authorities
a) the UK Financial Authorities;
b) His Majesty’s Treasury (HMT);
c) National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) including in its capacity as Single Point of Contact
(SPOC) and/or Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT);
d) Competent authorities under the Network and Information Systems Regulations 2018 and
any future or successor legislation. In particular, the Information Commissioner’s Office
(ICO) and Office of Communications (OFCOM);
e) any other departments of His Majesty’s Government (HMG), public bodies and agencies
to the extent necessary for coordinating an incident response, such as those responsible
for protecting critical infrastructure or responding to major crimes; and
f) successor authorities to any of the authorities referred to in a) to d).
2. Condition
For the purposes of Article 12(6) of this MoU, an authority listed in paragraph 1 of this Appendix shall
be considered as an onward sharing authority under the condition that the confidential information is
transmitted only where necessary for the performance of the disclosing authorities’ lawful monitoring
or supervisory tasks over for the UK Financial Authorities, CTPs, or for the ESAs, CTPPs. This paragraph
does not apply in respect of onward sharing between the Authorities.
The information received shall in any event be subject, in accordance with applicable law, to
professional secrecy requirements at least equivalent to those applicable to the UK Financial
8 Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the recovery and
resolution of credit institutions and investment firms (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 190–348).
22
Authorities (in respect of information which a UK Financial Authority has shared onward) or the ESAs
(in respect of information which an ESA has shared onward).
In addition to such professional secrecy requirements as may be required by law, confidential
information will not be further disclosed by the onward sharing authority, except to other authorities
listed in paragraph 1 of this Appendix, and subject to the obligation to notify the Authority which
provided the information in accordance with Article 12(6) of this MoU or as authorised by an Authority
in accordance with Article 12(5) of this MoU.
3. Notification
By way of derogation to Article 12(6) of this MoU, no notification is required for the ESAs or the UK
Financial Authorities where information is shared:
a) within their organisation and governance; or
b) for the ESAs, within the European System of Financial Supervisors as referred to in Article
2(2) of the ESAs Regulations,
c) for the UK Financial Authorities, among the UK Financial Authorities for the purposes of
carrying out the functions set out in paragraph 2 of this Appendix.
23