dd month yyyy
JC SC DOR XX-YY-ZZ
Report on the feasibility for further centralisation of
reporting of major ICT-related incidents
Article 21 of REGULATION (EU) 2022/2554
2
Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................. 4
1 Background ..................................................................................................................................................... 8
1.1 Legal mandate ....................................................................................................................................... 9
1.2 Methodology and structure of the report .............................................................................................. 10
2 Competent authorities under DORA: Roles and responsibilities ................................................................... 13
2.1 Incident reporting under DORA ............................................................................................................ 13
2.2 Competent authorities .......................................................................................................................... 15
3 Existing Systems: Frameworks and IT systems ............................................................................................ 21
3.1 Existing frameworks and IT systems at EU Level ................................................................................ 21
3.2 Existing systems at National Level ....................................................................................................... 24
4 Stock-taking and stakeholder consultation .................................................................................................... 28
4.1 Stock taking exercise with CAs ............................................................................................................ 28
4.2 Stakeholder Questionnaire ................................................................................................................... 29
5 High level business requirements ................................................................................................................. 34
6 Commercial solutions .................................................................................................................................... 39
7 Identification overview of potential options .................................................................................................... 42
7.1 Baseline Scenario ................................................................................................................................ 42
7.2 Identification of alternatives for further centralisation ........................................................................... 44
7.3 Differences between the Baseline Scenario and the Data Sharing Scenario ....................................... 47
8 Assessment .................................................................................................................................................. 49
8.1 Limitations ............................................................................................................................................ 49
8.2 Assessment areas ................................................................................................................................ 50
8.3 High-level cost identification ................................................................................................................. 53
8.4 High-level Cost Benefit Analysis .......................................................................................................... 57
8.5 Considerations about future implementation ........................................................................................ 62
9 Conclusions .................................................................................................................................................. 64
Annex .................................................................................................................................................................... 67
Annex I: Assessment summary - Gartner Consulting ........................................................................................ 67
Annex II: Gartner Consulting CBA and Conclusions ......................................................................................... 75
Annex III: Existing Systems ............................................................................................................................... 80
Annex IV: Existing systems at National - Level ................................................................................................. 91
Annex V: Stock taking exercise with CAs .......................................................................................................... 93
Annex VI: Stakeholders Questionnaire ............................................................................................................ 100
Annex VII: Stakeholders Questionnaire: BSG joint response. ......................................................................... 105
Annex VIII: Request for information (RfI) ......................................................................................................... 112
3
Executive Summary
1. DORA under article 21 requires that European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) prepare a
joint report assessing the feasibility of further centralisation of incident reporting through
the establishment of a single EU Hub for ICT-related incident reporting. To this end, this
report presents the results of the study performed to understand and assess the options
of further centralisation of incident reporting under DORA. This study has also been
carried out concurrently with the drafting of DORA technical standards on incident
reporting.
2. Considering the DORA legal mandate for this work, the report serves as a guide for
exploration and comprehension of further centralisation of incident reporting. Accordingly,
the report aims at informing any further discussions towards centralisation of incident
reporting and thus any future decision to set up a further centralised solution would
require further technical implementation studies and DORA amendments.
3. The report was prepared by the ESAs in collaboration with the Competent Authorities
(CAs), who provided significant input in view of their existing experience and incident
reporting solutions. The ESAs also collaborated closely with the European Central Bank
(ECB) and Single Resolution Board (SRB), as per the DORA mandate, they are key
stakeholders and receivers of incidents in the DORA reporting regime. Further, the
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) also participated due to its expertise
in cybersecurity and its EU role particularly in incident reporting and management. This
collaborative approach ensured a comprehensive perspective, drawing on the insights
from both financial and cybersecurity viewpoints.
4. The structure of the report mirrors the methodology used to perform this feasibility study.
It includes a thorough analysis of the DORA legal basis and the incident reporting flows
and roles and responsibilities established therein, comprehensive stock-taking exercises
both on existing incident reporting regimes in the financial sector at EU level, as well as
different available solutions, the general minimum high level requirements of an incident
reporting system, the identification of the three scenarios to be assessed, the assessment
based on the elements identified in Article 21(2) and the subsequent cost and benefit
analysis, as well as the overall conclusion. The report thus presents comprehensive
information on each of these elements, with additional supporting information and
analyses in the technical annexes.
5. The identification of the different scenarios with increasing levels of centralisation, as well
as the definition of the baseline scenario, are derived from DORA, particularly Recital 55
and Article 21:
a. the baseline,
b. the data sharing (baseline encompassing also other national authorities, such as
the NIS authorities); and
c. the fully centralised model (single EU hub)1.
1 It is important to highlight that although DORA Recital 55 includes two centralisation scenarios, in general terms, for the
purposes of this study, we will refer to the EU-Hub as the most centralised solution.
4
6. The baseline scenario is the model which implements the existing DORA incident
reporting flows, as per Article 19, and which according to DORA should be operational
from 17 January 2025. This model remains largely decentralised, where financial entities
report directly to the designated competent authorities in accordance with the reporting
modalities and tools in place at national level. The competent authorities then transmit
these reports onwards to other national and European authorities, with the ESAs then
disseminating the incidents to relevant competent authorities.
7. The data sharing is a model based on the baseline solution, but where financial entities
(FEs) would continue to report to the competent authority responsible for their
supervision, in accordance with the reporting modalities and tools in place at national
level. The main difference, however, is that in this scenario, decentralised dissemination
is no longer required. Once the report is submitted to the single solution available to
competent authorities, it is automatically disseminated both nationally and at the
European level to the relevant stakeholders, according to their respective responsibilities.
8. The fully centralised model envisages financial entities reporting directly to the EU hub,
which is accessible to stakeholders based on their specific roles and responsibilities and
from which they receive notifications. This model also allows for the development of
enhanced analytical capabilities, eliminating the need to duplicate such capabilities at a
decentralised level. In this scenario, while the financial entities will report onto a
centralised system, the competent authorities are still expected to be a first point of
contact from the perspective of supervisory engagement, response, and follow-up. This
solution would aim at facilitating the collection, dissemination and offering of advanced
analytical capabilities of the incidents and at creating efficiencies at EU level.
9. The assessment across these three models was performed considering the elements
identified in Article 21(2) on technical and legal prerequisites for the establishment of the
EU hub, limitations and risks , especially related to the high concentration of sensitive
information, capabilities to ensure interoperability with other reporting schemes,
operational management, conditions of membership, technical arrangements for access
of financial entities and national competent authorities, and preliminary assessment of
financial costs incurred.
10. The report also identified the key limitations of the analysis, in view of important known
unknowns at the time that the assessment was performed. Specifically, those relate to
unknown number of total major ICT-related incidents expected, unknown specific design
and development needs, interoperability with NCAs IT systems used for supervisory
response and follow-up, and unknown timelines for the decision to move to a fully
centralised solution.
11. Regarding the risks related to the high concentration of sensitive information, the report
identifies that the fully centralised solution would be exposed to a higher risk of loss of
the incident data availability, under the assumption that the data is not replicated at
national level. This risk would warrant comprehensive information security controls to be
built-in such centralised solution, and could result in higher complexity and cost, in a way
that it is not possible to estimate in a precise manner at this stage. It is also worthwhile
noting that in terms of loss of confidentiality and integrity risk, that in the baseline scenario
the information on reporting would be already stored in a database centralised at ESAs
5
level, and thus already subject to such risks. Overall, this makes the information security
risks (confidentiality, integrity, availability, when data is replicated at national level-)
associated with the fully centralised solution only marginally higher in comparison to the
baseline scenario.
12. The report concludes that all three models are feasible, noting that the baseline scenario
already has to be implemented in 2025. For the other two models, their implementation
is considered feasible within 3 years for the data sharing solution, given this could be
implemented progressively from the baseline solution and from 5 years onwards for the
fully centralised hub. This timeline considers the amendments that would need to be
made to DORA to enable these models, as well as the complexity of other elements
(technical, operational, governance) that would need to be in place.
13. In terms of costs, the analysis shows that there is no significant difference among the
three scenarios assessed and from overall cost perspective2 all three solutions are in a
similar range. Specifically, for the fully centralised scenario, in absolute terms, would
normally be able to ensure some savings, considering that the implementation of one
platform would be less costly than the implementation of many At the same time, taking
into account the costs linked to the implementation of the baseline solution, which was
inevitable given the legal requirement to have a decentralised DORA ICT-related
reporting in January 2025, potential saving opportunities would materialise only in the
longer term.
14. The report also highlights that certain features of the fully centralised solution potentially
offer advantages that are either exclusive to the centralised model or can only be fully
realised through its implementation. Those features and capabilities include streamlining
reporting channels by avoiding parallel reporting; features shortening report
dissemination time and response time for cross-border incidents; shortening onwards
dissemination times to all stakeholders, which would be an important prerequisite towards
the operation of a cybersecurity crisis management framework and early warning; as well
as advanced analytical capabilities or even direct access for FEs for analytical purposes
(contributing to the objective of increasing data available to (re)insurers in line with
EIOPA’s strategy on Cyber Underwriting of 20203).
15. Further, considering also the many known unknowns and limitations in the assessment,
as highlighted above and the ongoing implementation of the DORA incident reporting
solution, the report also highlights the importance of further analysis towards informing
the decision on a fully centralised system. Any decision about future centralisation should
prioritise and have as a guiding principle in the design of such a solution the fundamental
objective of incident reporting linked to the collection, analysis, dissemination, and
response to such incidents.
16. Finally, the study clearly shows further centralisation and a single EU Hub scenario is
feasible and brings certain benefits. At the same time, local solutions have already been
or are in the process of being built at national level to enable reporting by 17 January
2 The overall cost perspective includes estimation of costs already sustained by competent authorities to implement their
national solutions to comply with DORA requirements and those relating to the implementation of the new solutions. The
latter are reported in terms of CAPEX and OPEX.
3 Cyber underwriting strategy - EIOPA
6
2025, in accordance with DORA requirements. Therefore, while there are also some
envisaged advantages and cost reductions in absolute terms for the fully centralised
scenario, it inevitably becomes less attractive with limited advantage and incentives for
changing the existing reporting channels; considering also that CAs would anyway need
to continue to invest in infrastructures enabling supervisory response and follow-up at
national level, even if a solution were to centralise fully incident data collection, validation
and analytical capabilities. It is thus important that co-legislators continue to assess and
consider further centralisation into a single EU hub, having regard to the different
elements and aspects highlighted in this report, especially also considering minimising
costs for transition to a fully centralised EU hub solution. In addition, such centralisation
would be more beneficial and would be worth considering within a wider context of EU
ICT-related incident reporting, beyond DORA.
7
1 Background
18. In the rapidly digitising global landscape, Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) has become an integral pillar of not only the society and the economy but also of
the global financial market. Concurrently, there has been a notable surge in ICT-related
incidents, from cybersecurity attacks to significant data breaches. These incidents pose
severe consequences for individuals, and financial entities. Across the European Union,
national competent authorities of the financial entities put a lot of effort into getting a
detailed overview over threats and incidents to assess and minimise risks and impact of
incidents on the financial market.
19. At the moment of drafting this report, the landscape for reporting ICT-related incidents in
the financial sector is fragmented across member states but also across different pieces
of legislation, resulting in different reporting methods.
20. However, the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) establishes a consistent incident
reporting framework across the Union for financial entities and requirements for major
ICT-related incidents to be forwarded to the relevant competent authorities in other
Member States and at EU level to be applied by 17 January 2025. DORA also requires,
under article 21, that European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) prepare a joint report
assessing the feasibility of further centralisation of incident reporting through the
establishment of a single EU Hub for ICT-related incident reporting and submit it to the
co-legislators by 17 January 2025. This meant that the work on implementing DORA
major ICT-related incident reporting under Article 19 of DORA needed to be performed
in parallel with the preparation of the feasibility report exploring further centralisation of
incident reporting. The feasibility report explores whether an EU Hub could facilitate the
flow of ICT-related incident reporting, reduce associated costs, support effective incident
response, and underpin thematic analyses with a view to enhancing coordination and
supervisory convergence.
21. Potential benefits of an EU Hub could be to aim to potentially foster more effective cross-
border coordination and facilitate a more rapid, informed, and efficient response to
incidents. By streamlining the reporting process, this EU Hub could also potentially
enhance the collective understanding of the evolving threat landscape and bolster the
Union's cybersecurity posture in the financial sector. The potential benefits, limitations
and risks of further centralisation will be explored in this report.
22. This report contains a feasibility study on options to further centralise incident reporting
under DORA, covering the aspects detailed in Article 21(1) of the said legislation, and all
those additional elements that are considered useful for the correct contextualization and
elaboration of the study. The ultimate objective is, therefore, to analyse the feasibility of
further centralisation as required under Article 21(1) by exploring different alternatives
described in this document.
23. The report was prepared by the ESAs in collaboration with the Competent Authorities
(CAs). The ESAs also collaborated closely with the European Central Bank (ECB), given
its pivotal role in the EU's financial infrastructure and its vested interest in maintaining
8
robust ICT security. Further, the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) also
participated due to its expertise in cybersecurity and its EU legal role particularly in
incident reporting and management as well as its technological capabilities in this field.4
This collaborative approach ensures a comprehensive perspective, drawing on the
insights from both financial and cybersecurity viewpoints.
1.1 Legal mandate
24. DORA is establishing a significant step forward in the harmonisation and strengthening
of ICT security, including with regard to incident reporting, within the EU's financial sector.
25. In this context, Article 21 of DORA mandates the ESAs to prepare a joint report assessing
the feasibility of further centralisation of incident reporting through the establishment of a
single EU hub for major ICT-related incident reporting by financial entities. Such joint
report shall explore ways to facilitate the flow of ICT-related incident reporting, reduce
associated costs and underpin thematic analyses with a view to enhancing supervisory
convergence. This involves assessing prerequisites, benefits, limitations, risks, and
financial costs of such an initiative, indicating a comprehensive examination prior to any
conclusive action.
26. It is important to note that the task assigned to ESAs under Article 21 does not go beyond
assessing the feasibility for a possible further centralisation of incident reporting.
Therefore, the mandate requires to explore, comprehend, and assess the possible further
centralisation of incident reporting, but it does not require the setting up a centralised
reporting solution (as also confirmed in recital 55 of DORA). This lack of a legal mandate
for setting up a single EU Hub, if found to be feasible, means that the potential decision
to set up such a hub lies in the future, contingent upon the findings of the mandated study
and the provision of an appropriate legal basis for any potential option.
27. Although the EU Hub referred to in Article 21 of DORA is intended primarily as a
centralised system where financial entities report directly to a centralised solution, recital
55 considers also an additional scenario, where the centralised system acts as a
coordination mechanism. For the purposes of this report, we will refer to the EU Hub as
the fully centralised scenario (please refer to section 7, Identification overview of potential
options).
28. Additionally, the rest of articles under Chapter III of DORA, which set out the requirements
for ICT-related incident management, classification and reporting further delineate the
reporting obligations and feedback mechanisms concerning ICT incidents, emphasising
the importance of harmonisation, feedback, and expanded scope, respectively. The
articles under Chapter III of DORA contain elements that could inform the technical
specification and operational design of such a hub given that they will support effective
incident reporting under the existing DORA framework.
4 ENISA plays a critical role in several pieces of legislation that are geared towards enhancing digital operational resilience
in the context of incident reporting. See Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2) Article 23(9), NIS2 Recital 106, Directive (EU)
2018/1972 (EECC) Article 40, and Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 (eIDAS) Article 19. ENISA also maintains CIRAS, the
Cybersecurity Incident Reporting and Analysis System
9
29. Article 19 of DORA provides a robust blueprint for the types of reports that a central hub
might process, specifying elements like time limits for notification and details for
establishing the relevance of reporting for other Member States. The development of
common draft regulatory and implementing technical standards, as outlined in Article 20
of DORA, will also serve as a guiding framework for defining the standard forms,
templates, and procedures a central hub should utilise. This would be particularly relevant
in handling ICT-related incidents and significant cyber threats.
30. The supervisory feedback mechanisms referred to in Article 22 of DORA, with the
provision of anonymised information and intelligence, are another essential element that
could inform the technical specifications of a central hub, as they would support the goal
of creating a centralised system that can effectively track and respond to ICT related
incidents across the EU.
31. Furthermore, the provision of Article 23 of DORA for operational or security payment-
related incidents concerning credit institutions, payment institutions, account information
service providers, and electronic money institutions could directly contribute to the scope
and operations of a central hub, ensuring it covers a wide range of financial entities.
32. In summary, while these articles of DORA do not legislate the creation of a single EU
hub, they can provide crucial technical and operational insights that could guide its
design, should its establishment be decided upon in the future.
33. In conclusion, in the current DORA framework, if the European Commission, the Council
and the European Parliament, to whom this report is addressed, decide to proceed with
further centralisation of incident reporting through the establishment of a single EU Hub,
a separate and specific legal mandate or a delegation project would be necessary.
1.2 Methodology and structure of the report
34. The methodology used for this feasibility study aims to provide a well-informed, objective
assessment of the feasibility of establishing a centralised solution for ICT-related incident
reporting. This report is based on the current DORA Level 1 requirements and is carried
out concurrently with the drafting of additional technical standards on incident reporting
that are relevant for such deliverable. Therefore, the assumptions of such study may
slightly change after the finalisation of the legislative process.
35. At the same time, the considerations regarding the baseline scenario are based on the
functional requirements and the reporting workflows expected for the tool that will be
operational at the beginning of 2025.
36. The study consists of eight main sections, in addition to the background.
• In Section 2, the reporting process under DORA is described, along with the roles and
responsibilities of the various competent authorities involved in the process.
• Section 3 analyses some examples of current frameworks and systems implemented
at both the European and national levels, as well as different available commercial
alternatives.
10
• During the drafting process, it was considered beneficial to gather information through
additional methods, particularly questionnaires and requests for information.
I. During the initial phases of the analysis (Q2 2023), a survey was circulated
among the various competent authorities to gather qualitative and quantitative
information regarding the incident reporting. This survey aimed to obtain valuable
insights and data pertaining to the incidents reported, including their nature,
frequency, and impact. By gathering this information, the study sought to gain a
preliminary understanding of the incident reporting landscape and provide a solid
foundation for further analysis of the feasibility of additional centralisation of the
reporting process.
II. Another questionnaire was shared with the entities represented in the
stakeholder groups of the three ESAs during Q3 of 2024 (primarily financial
entities, industry associations, academia and user representatives).
III. The results of these questionnaires are summarised in Section 4 and detailed in
the annexes. The information gathered has informed the cost-benefit analysis
included in Section 8.
• The analysis of requirements presented in Section 5 is a preliminary and high-level
overview of functional and non-functional requirements of a general incident reporting
system and it should be further explored in case of the adoption of any of the proposed
solutions. Depending on the outcome of the detailed requirements analysis the
solutions proposed in this paper may need to be adapted at later stages.
• To investigate whether commercial (off-the-shelf) solutions are available on the market
that can meet DORA's data collection, assessment, analysis, dissemination and
notification requirements, a market scan was conducted, the results are also included
in section 6 and the description of the methodology for this request for information is
also included in the annex.
• The identification of the different centralisation options, as well as the definition of the
baseline scenario, are derived from the information contained in DORA, particularly
Recital 55 and Article 21. More information about this process can be found in Section
7.
• Section 8 includes the assessment results:
I. To assess and compare the different scenarios the criteria listed in DORA Art
21(2) were used, a summary of the assessment is included in this section. An
additional assessment of the three scenarios performed by and independent firm
(Gartner Consulting) is included in the annex.
II. A cost-benefit analysis was carried out considering different stakeholder groups
in order to obtain a holistic view of the different scenarios and to analyse the
different impacts of the scenarios on these different groups.
III. In the same section possible considerations for future implementation have been
included, these considerations aim to elaborate on the feasibility of the various
options beyond the elements for the assessment identified in DORA and the
functional requirement.
11
• Once the assessment is presented, the report's conclusions are elaborated in Section
9.
37. The Report also includes an Annex where more detailed information is presented, in
particular expanding the content of Sections 3, 4 and 8.
12
2 Competent authorities under DORA: Roles and
responsibilities
38. The reporting process outlined in Article 19 aims to facilitate effective incident
management, enhance transparency, and enable the competent authorities to take
appropriate measures to safeguard the resilience of the financial sector.
39. Article 19 of the DORA establishes a comprehensive reporting process for incidents
within the financial sector. This process ensures that financial entities promptly notify the
relevant competent authorities of any major ICT-related incidents. Under Article 19, once
an incident is detected, financial entities shall report it to their respective Competent
Authority5 (CA). The CA then evaluates the severity and potential impact of the incident
and collaborates with other competent authorities, both at the national and European
levels, to coordinate incident response activities and information sharing.
40. This section focuses on the roles and responsibilities of the competent authorities
involved in incident reporting under this regulation. These competent authorities,
designated at both the national and European levels, play vital roles in establishing
reporting mechanisms, receiving incident notifications, assessing incident severity, and
coordinating incident response. Their collaboration and expertise contribute to a
comprehensive incident reporting framework that enables prompt and effective
management of incidents in the financial sector.
41. Before analysing the role and responsibilities of each competent authority, it is important
to understand and explain the reporting process foreseen by DORA. This process
encompasses the requirements and procedures set for financial entities to promptly
report incidents to the relevant competent authorities. By understanding the reporting
process, we can gain insights into how the various competent authorities fulfil their roles
and responsibilities in incident reporting.
2.1 Incident reporting under DORA
42. Effective incident reporting including the classification, management and reporting of
incidents is one of the basic pillars of DORA and Chapter III of this regulation is dedicated
to it. Within this chapter, Article 19 defines, first, the flow of reports from financial
institutions to the competent authorities and then the flow of information from the latter to
other stakeholders.
5 The list of Competent Authorities is identified in Article 46 of DORA
13
43. Figure 1 identifies the main reporting lines6 for the different actors involved in the process,
which can be summarised in two main steps, as follows:
I. The beginning of the reporting flow starts at the financial entities, which (directly or
through a third-party service provider) shall report to the relevant competent authority
(as set out in Article 46), for incidents considered major, the initial notification (and
subsequently the intermediate and final reports) using the templates set out in Article
20 and within the time period set out in the same article.
II. This reporting shall be made to a single authority, notwithstanding that in certain
countries such information shall also be forwarded to the competent authorities or the
computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs) designated or established in
accordance with Directive (EU) 2022/2555.
III. Credit institutions classified as significant, in accordance with article 6(4) of Regulation
(EU) 1024/2013, shall report to the relevant national competent authority designated in
accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2013/36/EU, which shall immediately transmit
that report to the ECB.
IV. Member States may additionally determine that some or all financial entities shall also
report to the competent authorities, or the computer security incident response teams
6 The reporting has three phases, initial, intermediate and final report, the reporting lines are equivalent for any phase of the
report.
14
(CSIRTs) designated or established in accordance with NIS2 Directive (green arrow in
Figure 1).
V. The competent authorities, upon receipt of the initial notifications, shall forward them,
as applicable and depending on the type of financial institution, to:
(a). EBA, ESMA or EIOPA.
(b). ECB.
(c). the competent authorities, single points of contact or CSIRTs designated or
established in accordance with Directive (EU) 2022/2555;
(d). resolution authorities and the Single Resolution Board (SRB);
(e). other relevant public authorities under national law.
VI. Once this initial notification is received, the 3 ESAs in coordination with the ECB and
ENISA shall assess whether the major incident is relevant for other authorities in other
member states. If so, the EBA, ESMA and EIOPA shall notify the competent authorities
(with certain considerations with respect to ESMA and central securities depository as
set out in Article 19 point 8).
VII. The ECB shall notify the members of the European System of Central Banks on issues
relevant to the payment system.
FIGURE 1 INCIDENTS DATA FLOW UNDER DORA
15
44. As can be seen in the graph and in the high-level description of the reporting flow, there
may be multiple channels of data exchange between different authorities and from
financial entities in the process, depending on the nature of the incident. Any incidents
that are local to a Member State (MS) will be dealt with by MS, with other Union authorities
kept informed as appropriate. It is relevant to note that in some MS the competent
authority may have different roles (e.g. central banks, resolution authorities, etc) and
therefore in these countries the incident flow may avoid additional communications at MS
level. This is currently the case for many of the incidents reported. Any incidents that have
a cross border impact, will be notified to the relevant competent authorities in other MS.
The purpose of this study will therefore be to analyse the possibility of advancing towards
further centralisation of incident reporting, and with a view to facilitating the flow of ICT
related incident reporting, reduce associated costs and underpin thematic analyses with
a view to enhancing supervisory convergence.
2.2 Competent authorities
45. Once explained the reporting flow of major incidents, we will delve deeper into the specific
roles and responsibilities of each competent authority, providing comprehensive insights
into their contributions to the incident reporting process as outlined in Article 19 and
Article 21 of DORA.
46. The competent authorities responsible for ensuring that financial entities comply with
DORA are set out in Article 46 of DORA. This is done by reference to a number of
provisions of European law. Depending on the type of financial entity, these provisions
reserve supervisory competence either to national competent authorities or to European
competent authorities (European Supervisory Authorities: EBA, ESMA or to the ECB).
47. National competent authorities should be understood as the competent authorities that
ensure compliance of financial entities with DORA and that have been designated for this
function in each Member State for a given category of financial entities in accordance
with the provisions referred to in Article 46 of DORA. National competent authorities under
DORA are responsible for the supervision of most of the categories of financial
institutions:7:
− credit institutions and institutions exempted pursuant to Directive 2013/36/EU;
− payment institutions, including payment institutions exempted pursuant to Directive
(EU) 2015/2366;
− electronic money institutions, including those exempted pursuant to Directive
2009/110/EC;
− account information service providers;
− investment firms;
− crypto-asset service providers and issuers of asset-referenced tokens;
7 The list is not exhaustive with respect to the regulation referred to a possible exceptions, for further details on this point
please refer to Article 46 of DORA.
16
− central securities depositories;
− central counterparties;
− trading venues;
− data reporting service providers constituting approved reporting mechanisms and
approved publication arrangements with a derogation in accordance with art. 2.3 of
Regulation (EU) No 600/2014;
− managers of alternative investment funds;
− management companies;
− insurance and reinsurance undertakings;
− insurance intermediaries, reinsurance intermediaries and ancillary insurance
intermediaries;
− institutions for occupational retirement provision;
− administrators of national critical benchmarks
− crowdfunding service providers.
48. On the other hand, the European competent authorities, ECB, EBA and ESMA, are
responsible for the supervision of:
− credit institutions classified as significant in accordance with Article 6(4) of
Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 (ECB);
− issuers of significant asset-referenced tokens (EBA);
− data reporting service providers other than approved reporting mechanisms and
approved publication arrangements with a derogation in accordance with art. 2.3 of
Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 (ESMA);
− trade repositories (ESMA);
− credit rating agencies (ESMA);
− administrators of European critical benchmarks (ESMA);
− securitisation repositories (ESMA).
2.2.1 National competent authorities and other relevant authorities and MS level
Bodies acting as national competent authorities in the Member States
49. Different Member States may have different arrangements for the competent authorities
responsible for the supervision of financial market entities. First, supervisory
responsibilities for many categories of financial market entities may be consolidated in a
single competent authority, as is, for example, the case with the Polish Financial
Supervision Authority. The latter is responsible for the national supervision of banks,
insurance companies and financial market entities.
17
50. Conversely, in some Member States different authorities may be responsible for
supervising different categories of financial market entities. An example is Croatia, where
the Croatian National Bank is responsible for the supervision of credit institutions whereas
the Croatian Financial Services Supervisory Agency is responsible for the supervision of
investment firms. In many countries, supervisory responsibilities are also exercised by
central banks (e.g., in Belgium by the National Bank of Belgium for credit institutions,
insurance undertakings, payment institutions, electronic money institutions, central
securities depositories and some types of investment firms).
Roles and responsibilities of national competent authorities regarding incident
reporting under DORA
51. DORA imposes a number of obligations on competent authorities in relation to incident
reporting. According to Article 19(1) of DORA, competent authorities (including national
competent authorities) remain responsible for receiving notifications of major ICT-related
incidents from financial entities. This includes the submission by financial entities to the
national competent authority of an initial notification, an intermediate report and a final
report. Article 19(4)(b) of DORA also gives competent authorities the power to request
an intermediate report on a major ICT-related incident from a financial entity, in order to
obtain additional information on the incident that is particularly important for the
competent authority.
52. Article 19(6) of DORA also obliges competent authorities to forward initial notification and
intermediate and final reports of major ICT-related incidents to the European and national
authorities mentioned in the provision. The provision emphasises that the competent
authority should share incident reports with the relevant authorities, taking into account
their respective competences. This assessment is an additional responsibility of the
competent authority as part of the process of communicating information to other
recipients as provided for in Article 19(6) DORA. Additional recipients of incident reports
include:
(a) EBA, ESMA, EIOPA;
(b) ECB;
(c) the competent authorities, single points of contact or CSIRTs designated or
established in accordance with Directive (EU) 2022/2555;
(d) the resolution authorities and the Single Resolution Board (SRB);
(e) other relevant public authorities under national law.
53. The exchange of information on major ICT-related incidents between national competent
authorities and EBA, ESMA and EIOPA is bilateral for incidents that have cross-border
implications. Upon receipt of an ICT-related incident report, EBA, ESMA or EIOPA and
the ECB carries out an analysis to assess whether the incident is relevant for competent
authorities in other Member States. In case of a positive assessment, EBA, ESMA or
EIOPA notifies the relevant national competent authority or authorities of the incident.
Such notification provides national competent authorities with an additional source of
information on ICT-related incidents in other Member States that may have cross-border
impact. EBA, ESMA and EIOPA consults with ENISA and cooperates with the relevant
18
competent authority when assessing the impact of a major ICT-related incident on other
Member States.
54. The provisions of DORA also provide for the competence of national competent
authorities to provide feedback to financial entities in relation to reports on major ICT-
related incidents. Upon receipt of the initial notification and of each report as referred to
in Article 19(4) of DORA, the competent authority acknowledges their receipt and may,
to the extent possible, provide appropriate and proportionate feedback or high-level
guidance to the financial entity in a timely manner, in particular by providing any relevant
anonymised information and intelligence on similar threats, and may discuss
countermeasures taken at the level of the financial actor and ways to minimise and
mitigate negative impacts across the financial sector. This does not, however, mean that
national competent authorities are delegated to deal with ICT-related incidents or their
consequences. As emphasised in Article 22(1) of DORA, financial entities remain fully
responsible for the handling and consequences of ICT-related incidents.
55. Taking into account the Article 23 of DORA, the above responsibilities of the national
competent authorities also apply to operational or security payment-related incidents and
to major operational or security payment-related incidents, where they concern credit
institutions, payment institutions, account information service providers, and electronic
money institutions.
2.2.2 EBA, ESMA and EIOPA
56. The ESAs are tasked with relevant roles under Article 19, Paragraphs 6-8 of DORA,
which focuses on the reporting of major ICT related incidents in the financial sector. Such
roles in incident reporting, risk evaluation, and information dissemination are fundamental
to ensuring a well-coordinated and effective response to major ICT-related incidents
within the EU's financial sector.
57. Upon the initial notification of a major ICT-related incident, the competent authority
forwards details of the incident to several entities, including the pertinent ESA (EBA,
ESMA, or EIOPA), as laid out in Paragraph 6 of Article 19. This distribution of information
allows for a comprehensive, coordinated response and fosters a unified approach to
address the incident across the European Union.
58. Upon the receipt of this information, in consultation with ENISA and in cooperation with
the relevant competent authority, the ESAs should assess the potential relevance of the
major ICT-related incident for authorities in other Member States. After this evaluation,
the ESAs are then tasked with notifying relevant competent authorities in other Member
States, thereby facilitating a cross-border information flow and response mechanism.
This notification responsibility should also be aligned with the cooperation arrangements
among competent authorities related to the supervision of financial entities.
59. In addition to their duties under Article 19, Article 22 of DORA lays out additional
responsibilities for the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs). This Article operates
under the principle that feedback, even at a high level, can provide valuable guidance for
mitigating the adverse impact of ICT-related incidents across the financial sector. It
19
envisions a dynamic relationship between competent authorities and financial entities,
where information exchange becomes the cornerstone of managing ICT-related risks.
60. Moreover, the second part of Article 22 extends the ESAs' role beyond incident
management to proactive risk analysis and communication. Through the Joint
Committee, the ESAs are required to prepare an annual report, which includes
information on the number, nature, and impact of major ICT-related incidents, remedial
actions taken, and costs incurred. These anonymised and aggregated data gives the
ESAs a comprehensive view of the landscape of ICT-related incidents.
61. Their report, therefore, becomes a valuable source of insights for financial entities and
regulatory authorities alike. Additionally, the ESAs are also entrusted with the task of
issuing warnings and producing high-level statistics to support ICT threat and vulnerability
assessments. This proactive role of the ESAs underlines their importance in maintaining
the stability and integrity of the EU financial sector.
62. The feasibility study explores the benefits of further centralisation of reporting major ICT-
related incidents. The study would explore also whether and how further centralisation
would improve incident data analysis at ESA level, as well as the facilitate the establishing
of a cyber crisis communication framework.
2.2.3 ECB
63. Under Article 19 of DORA the ECB also has a specific role. Firstly, with regard to the
reporting of incidents by credit institutions classified as significant (Article 19(1) paragraph
3). These financial institutions shall report directly to the relevant national competent
authority designated in accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2013/36/EU, and this
national competent authority shall transmit this information to the ECB.
64. It is important to note that such reporting should be done immediately. This approach
differs from the general information flow in Article 19(6) from Competent Authorities to
other stakeholders, where the text provides for reporting in a "timely manner".
65. In point 6 the ECB is also part of the recipients of this general information flow, in
particular for incidents related to credit institutions, payment institutions, including
payment institutions exempted pursuant to Directive (EU) 2015/2366; and electronic
money institutions, including electronic money institutions exempted pursuant to Directive
2009/110/EC.
66. The ECB under point 7 of the same article shall participate in the analysis of the relevance
of incidents received for competent authorities in other member states.
67. Under the same point, the ECB shall also notify the members of the European System of
Central Banks on issues relevant to the payment system.
68. It is therefore worth noting that the ECB's role as receiver and distributor of incidents is
twofold and the reporting line is also duplicated depending on the type of incident and the
financial institution.
20
2.2.4 SRB
69. The SRB, together with the resolution authorities, is the recipient of the subset of incidents
related to the entities referred to in Articles 7(2), (4)(b) and (c) and (5) of Regulation (EU)
No 806/2014 if such incidents pose a risk to ensure critical functions. Critical functions
being understood as those activities, services or operations the discontinuance of which
is likely in one or more Member States, to lead to the disruption of services that are
essential to the real economy or to disrupt financial stability due to the size, market share,
external and internal interconnectedness, complexity or cross-border activities of an
institution or group, with particular regard to the substitutability of those activities, services
or operations.
2.2.5 ENISA
70. ENISA's role in the incident flow is primarily consultative. ENISA shall be consulted in the
process that assesses the relevance of an ICT-related incident for competent authorities
in other Member States.
21
3 Existing Systems: Frameworks and IT systems
71. Incident reporting, whether ICT-related or of other types, is part of the information flow
between financial sector entities and the various competent authorities. This is the case
both for systems at EU level and for systems implemented at Member State level.
72. Such a framework around the receipt of incidents not only has certain processes and
tasks associated with it, but often relies on technological solutions to support them. In this
section we briefly elaborate on some (pre-DORA) use cases at both EU and national level
to try to get an overview of the current state of incident reporting for some of the
stakeholders involved in the incident reporting process in DORA.
73. A more detailed overview of the different use cases can be found in the Annex III: Existing
Systems.
3.1 Existing frameworks and IT systems at EU Level
3.1.1 ESMA
74. ESMA plays an important role in incident reporting within the EU financial markets. It has
both direct and shared supervisory responsibilities. ESMA directly oversees EU Credit
Rating Agencies, Trade Repositories, Securitisation Repositories, certain Data Reporting
Services Providers, specific benchmark administrators, and Tier 2 third-country Central
Counterparties. These entities are governed by various regulations such as the CRA
Regulation, EMIR, SFTR, MiFID II, the Benchmark Regulation, and EMIR 2.2.
75. ESMA has also issued guidelines for some of its supervisory mandates on periodic
information reporting, providing the legal basis for ICT-related incident reporting. ESMA
and NCAs work together, forming a comprehensive framework for incident reporting and
management. This collaboration aims to enhance the resilience of the financial market
infrastructure against ICT-related threats.8
76. ESMA has developed procedures for the full lifecycle of each incident, from its initial
reporting by supervised entities to its monitoring and assessment. Supervised entities are
requested to report incidents to ESMA according to a specific process and in a designated
template. The reporting process starts with an initial notification, followed at a later stage
by a full notification, both sent via an online portal.
77. This process is partially supported by a technology solution that allows the incidents to
be logged and monitored in an appropriate manner, as well as by visualisation tools that
provide a complete picture of the status of the situation for a particular incident as well as
for the incidents as a whole.
8 In the new proposed reporting guidelines, which are out for public consultation in the moment of drafting this report, incident
reporting is now defined as to be performed in line with the template set out in the relevant Commission Implementing
Regulation to be adopted pursuant to DORA, this is to facilitate compliance for reporting entities subject to DORA as opposed
to creating a separate template.
22
3.1.2 EBA
78. The revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) conferred the EBA with the mandate to
collect and disseminate reports on major security or operational payment-related
incidents. Since 2018, the EBA has been receiving major incident reports impacting
payment service providers (PSPs), including credit institutions, payment institutions, and
e-money institutions. The reporting flow involves PSPs submitting initial, intermediate, or
final reports to their Competent Authorities, which are then forwarded to the EBA and the
ECB. Upon receipt of these reports, the EBA, ECB, and the submitting CA assess the
incident's relevance to other Member States and notify the respective CAs. Additionally,
the EBA, in collaboration with the ECB and the home Member State's competent
authority, assesses the incident's relevance to other Union and national authorities and
notifies them accordingly.
79. The classification and reporting provisions of major incidents under PSD2, including
classification criteria, materiality thresholds, reporting templates, data field descriptions,
and instructions, are outlined in the EBA Guidelines on major incident reporting under
PSD2. Based on the reports received, the EBA and the ECB monitor high-level reporting
trends, leading to the revision of guidelines, organisation of industry workshops, and
informing policy development related to incident mandates under DORA.
80. The European Centralised Infrastructure for Supervisory Data (EUCLID) platform is the
current system for banking and financial data in the EU’s financial sector which is place
since its implementation 2021. EUCLID keeps evolving in terms of scope of reporting
entities and functionalities, with a data dissemination platform being launched during Q4
2023 and Q1 2024 (phase 1 and 2, respectively). In addition, it is complemented with the
EBA’s public registers, namely the Credit Institutions Register (CIR) and the Payments
Institutions register (PIR) under the Payments Service Directive (PSD2), and possibly
with a critical Third-Party Providers register in coming years.
81. The current reporting scope to the EBA covers over 10,000 reporting entities including
EU/EEA credit institutions banking groups, investment firms, investment firms’ groups,
resolution groups, payment and e-money institutions.
3.1.3 EIOPA
82. EIOPA has been taking several initiatives to monitor risks and identify opportunities in the
context of the cyber underwriting. Acknowledging the critical role of a comprehensive
incident reporting system, EIOPA recognises the invaluable insights derived from incident
data for cyber risk assessment and management. The incident reporting data is essential
for cyber underwriting processes, enabling the development of tailored insurance policies
that reflect the market’s specific cyber risk profile. Thus, it is important that the incident
data collected as part of DORA reporting framework will be made available to cyber
23
underwriters (insurance and reinsurance undertakings and intermediaries) in line with
EIOPA’s strategy on cyber underwriting9.
3.1.4 ENISA
83. ENISA maintains an incident reporting tool, called CIRAS (Cybersecurity Incident
Reporting and Analysis System), for the authorities, where they can upload reports, and
search for and study specific incidents. At the moment, the main use for CIRAS is to
support the annual summary reporting for NIS Directive, EECC Art. 40 and eIDAS Art.
19.
84. Both the data flow and the data typology supported by this solution are very similar to
those established in DORA. The tool has capabilities to receive reported incidents and
disseminate them to relevant stakeholders. Moreover, its scope of action is similar, as it
works mainly with incidents in the field of cybersecurity.
3.1.5 ECB
85. As mentioned under section 3.1.2, the ECB has been receiving major incident reports
impacting payment service providers (PSPs), including credit institutions, payment
institutions, and e-money institutions, in accordance with the provisions under the PSD2
(and as outlined in the EBA Guidelines on major incident reporting under PSD2). The
reporting flow involves PSPs submitting initial, intermediate, or final reports to their
Competent Authorities, which are then forwarded to a reporting platform hosted by the
EBA (to which both EBA and ECB have access).
86. Upon receipt of these reports, the ECB, along with the EBA and the submitting CA
assesses the incident's relevance to other Member States as well as other Union and
national authorities and notifies them accordingly. In addition, the EBA and the ECB
monitor high-level reporting trends (see also section 3.1.2).
87. The SSM Cyber Incident Reporting Framework has been established as a central
mechanism to collect, analyse, and draw actionable insights from significant cyber
incidents, helping to monitor credit institutions and to uphold the resilience of the financial
system. The entities in scope of the SSM Cyber Incident Reporting Framework are
Significant Institutions10 that are supervised by the ECB (“Supervised Institutions”). These
institutions report cyber incidents that fulfil the reporting criteria at the highest level of
consolidation (within the SSM). The objectives of the framework focus primarily on: i)
assessing the impact to the bank in an immediate follow-up, identifying critical cyber
incidents that could potentially lead to a crisis situation and ii) drawing potential
conclusions from the cyber incident for the supervisory assessment of the overall cyber
risk of the bank.
9 In order to allow for sound pricing, underwriting and cyber risk management, the availability of data on cyber incidents
should be broadened and appropriately standardised, while safeguarding the level playing field and data confidentiality.
Ultimately, the access to cyber incident database(s), potentially a European Database, could be seen as a public good and
underpin the further development of the European cyber insurance industry and act as an enabler of the digital economy.
EIOPA Digital Underwriting, Strategy, 2020, p.3
10 https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/banking/list/html/index.en.html
24
88. At its core, the framework establishes a streamlined procedure and a database, set up
as a centralised repository for significant cyber incidents. Supervised Institutions report
directly to the ECB or, for some countries with pre-existing national cyber incident
reporting regulations, via their National Competent Authorities (NCAs). The incidents are
reported via a standardised Excel-based template, to ensure collection of consistent
information across all incidents. Details about the current reporting process are explained
in Section 3.3.1.3.
89. The ECB’s Cyber Incident Team is set up to operate the reporting process, bridging
communications among banks, NCAs, and the JSTs. Its role also includes gauging the
impact of each incident, invoking and running the dedicated Cyber Incident Emergency
Process (CIEP), with participation of experts across the ECB and NCA functional areas,
in cases of highly critical (“major”) incidents. The ECB’s Cyber Incident Team is acting
both in capacity of an expert function, providing support to JSTs in specific cases, and as
an analytical function, providing insights on a cross-bank level.
3.2 Existing systems at National Level
90. In the same way that the different incident reporting frameworks have generated different
frameworks and technological solutions at the European level, the competent authorities
in the different member states have developed their own frameworks and systems to
meet their needs.
91. In this section we briefly present some examples, although these are not exhaustive as
each Member State has been able to opt for different models, both in terms of procedures
and technological solutions, derived from their needs and the various competent
authorities and their degree of integration.
92. It is important to note that often the competent authorities in the member states operate
as a middle point between the reporting entities and other bodies at the European level,
in a similar way to that established for incident reporting in DORA.
3.2.1 Roles and responsibilities of national competent authorities regarding incident
reporting under national laws
93. National competent authorities may have other roles and responsibilities under national
law with regard to incident reporting. Such roles and responsibilities often involve
cooperation with other competent authorities at Member State level.
94. An example of this type of regulations can be found in particular in the provisions
implementing the NIS Directive (replaced by the NIS2 Directive) in each Member State.
NIS Directive provides for operators of essential services to notify the competent authority
or the CSIRT of incidents having a significant impact on the continuity of the essential
services they provide. Its scope of application covers several economic sectors, in order
to achieve a high common level of security of network and information systems within the
Union so as to improve the functioning of the internal market. It also covers certain entities
in the banking sector (credit institutions) and financial market infrastructures (operators
of trading venues and central counterparties).
25
95. The NIS Directive requires Member States to designate one or more national competent
authorities for network and information systems security. The main task of the NIS
competent authorities is to monitor the application of the Directive at national level.
96. At the same time, it introduces an obligation to designate a single point of contact for
network and information system security in each Member State. This is intended to
facilitate cross-border cooperation. The provisions of the NIS Directive also provide for
other mechanisms for cooperation with national authorities. For example, competent
authorities should, whenever appropriate and in accordance with national law, consult
and cooperate with relevant national law enforcement authorities and national data
protection authorities.
97. The NIS Directive also requires the designation of one or more Computer Security
Incidents Response Teams (CSIRTs) in each Member State. The provisions of the NIS
Directive provide for a number of cybersecurity-related tasks for those teams, including:
(a) monitoring incidents at a national level;
(b) providing early warning, alerts, announcements and dissemination of information to
relevant stakeholders about risks and incidents;
(c) responding to incidents;
(d) providing dynamic risk and incident analysis and situational awareness;
(e) participating in the CSIRTs network.
3.2.2 Collaboration with other competent authorities at the national level and cross-
border incident reporting and cooperation
98. Depending on national arrangements, in some Member States, the role of the NIS
Directive competent authority for operators of essential services from sectors of banking
and financial market infrastructures, as well as the related role of the CSIRT, may be
performed by national competent authorities responsible for ongoing financial market
supervision (Poland may be an example of such a country - see the case study section
below for more information). If, on the other hand, the role of the NIS Directive competent
authority or the role of the CSIRT under NIS Directive is performed by another national
authority, cooperation between these authorities and the competent national authorities
responsible for the day-to-day supervision of the financial market in the area of incidents
in financial market entities is essential. This may also involve national resolution
authorities or national authorities responsible for macro-prudential supervision.
99. In addition to cooperation on incident reporting at national level, competent authorities in
Member States can also participate in cross-border cooperation mechanisms in this area.
These include the arrangements provided for in the NIS Directive, such as the
Cooperation Group on Security of Networks and Information Systems and the CSIRTs
Network.
100. The Cooperation Group is composed of representatives of the Member States, the
Commission and ENISA, and some of its tasks are directly related to incident reporting
issues, such as exchanging best practices on the exchange of information related to
incident reporting, producing annual summary incident reports based on anonymised and
26
aggregated data, collecting best practice information on risks and incidents, or discussing
modalities for reporting incidents. In turn, the members of the CSIRTs Network include
representatives of the Member States' CSIRTs and CERT-EU, and most of the tasks of
the CSIRTs Network are incident related. These include, inter alia:
− exchanging and discussing non-commercially sensitive information related to the
incident and associated risks, at the request of a representative of a CSIRT from
a Member State potentially affected by an incident;
− exchanging and making available on a voluntary basis non-confidential
information concerning individual incidents;
− discussing and, where possible identifying a coordinated response to an incident
that has been identified within the jurisdiction of the Member State, at the request
of a representative of a Member State's CSIRT;
− providing Member States with support in addressing cross-border incidents on the
basis of their voluntary mutual assistance; or
− discussing, exploring and identifying further forms of operational cooperation,
including in relation to categories of risks and incidents as well as principles and
modalities for coordination, when Member States respond to cross-border risks
and incidents.
101. Information exchange on incidents involving financial market entities can also take place
through other cooperation mechanisms, in particular the Single Supervisory Mechanism
(SSM). It should be noted that not all national competent authorities of the Member States
are involved in the cooperation under this mechanism. It only applies to countries.
3.2.3 Use Case: Polish Financial Supervision Authority
102. The Polish Financial Supervision Authority (PFSA) is an example of a national competent
authority with tasks connected with incident reporting.
103. These obligations derive primarily from the National Cyber Security System Act, which
implements the NIS Directive. Pursuant to Article 41 of the Act, the PFSA remains the
competent authority for the sector of banking and financial market infrastructure. In
addition, a sector-level CSIRT team (CSIRT KNF) has been established within the PFSA
for the relevant sector. This team, in addition to the national CSIRTs, receives major
incident reports from operators of essential services in the banking and financial market
infrastructure sector.
104. The team's tasks also include assisting operators of essential services in handling
cybersecurity incidents, as well as analysing major incidents, finding links between
incidents and drawing conclusions from incidents handling. As part of its tasks, the sector-
level CSIRT team cooperates with the CSIRT teams at national level to coordinate the
handling of major incidents.
105. Entities classified as operators of essential services are required to report security
incidents to the relevant national level CSIRT team and sector level CSIRT. Reporting to
the national and sector level CSIRT teams is done via a dedicated web form on the
27
website, or via a prepared PDF form sent via email. In the case of emailing, an additional
mechanism is used in the form of PGP encryption.
106. The incident handling process uses the well-known open source RTIR (Request Tracker
for Incident Report) solution - the use of the tool allows the handling of reported incidents
to be organised and structured. PSD2 incidents are reported directly to the Competent
Authority using a dedicated and pre-differentiated form in an XLS file. Files are sent using
the government's ePUAP system.
28
4 Stock-taking and stakeholder consultation
4.1 Stock taking exercise with CAs
107. To gather the necessary insights and information for the feasibility study, a data collection
exercise has been conducted during March 2023, primarily through the utilisation of a
survey. It is important to consider that the results obtained during the survey may have
changed by the time the report was completed. This survey has enabled ESAs to obtain
valuable input from key stakeholders (i.e. competent authorities at national and EU level),
facilitating a thorough understanding of their reporting needs and preferences. This
survey has encompassed a wide range of topics related to incident reporting, including
existing reporting processes, data flows, data quality, reporting volumes, and key
challenges faced by CA when it comes to reporting.
108. A detailed presentation of the answers to each of the sections can be found in the Annex
V. We present here information regarding the overall benefits and risks identified with
future further centralised reporting.
4.1.1 Views on the establishment of the single EU Hub for incident reporting under
DORA
109. The final section of the survey focused on obtaining the views of the different CAs on the
future adoption of a single EU Hub to further centralise reporting, the feasibility analysis
of which is the subject of this document. With a view to being able to analyse the data,
certain categories were created where respondents could rank the main challenges and
risks on the one hand, and the main benefits on the other.
110. Focusing on the risks, most CAs emphasised the nature of the data and the
considerations needed to protect the information, but also aspects related to the
governance and integration of any future solutions as well as the possible suboptimal
integration between DORA and NIS authorities. Although not presented in the graph
below, several CAs expressed concerns about possible delays in receiving information
from financial entities they are responsible for supervising and the possible loss of
immediate contact between financial entities and their competent authorities in the event
of further centralisation of reporting.
29
30
22 24 25 26 27
19
15
6
Sensitive nature Sensitive nature
of information on of information on
Suboptimal
incidents, with incidents,
integration/align The centralised
some of these unauthorised
Set-up and the ment between infrastructure
The necessary falling under Challenges / access,
The conditions run of the central competent would also
capability to member state risks associated modification or
reletad to the infrastructure authorities under require a Other
ensure national securitywith ‘single point disclosure of this
membership could be quite DORA and dedicated
interoperability remit, and thus of failure’ data could result
costly competent governance
subject to not only in
authorities under framework
specific important
NIS
confidentiality reputation risks,
requirements… but also…
6 19 22 24 25 26 27 30 15
FIGURE 2 POTENTIAL RISKS LINKED TO FURTHER CENTRALISATION
111. On the other hand, several benefits related to the establishment of a centralised Hub
were also identified. Simplification of reporting, elimination of duplication and quicker
access to information on incidents under DORA by all relevant authorities were the main
benefits identified as being linked to the implementation of a future solution with a higher
degree of centralisation.
22 23 24 25 26 27
17
15
12
Avoid
Reduced overall Better and Quicker access to
Simplify data establishing
implementation Symplified quicker Better information on
reporting and Eliminating the multiple bilateral
cost and the access/reporting identification of standardisation incidents under
exchange risk of duplicative reporting flows Other
running cost after for reporting multiple attacks and quality of DORA by all
process/es in reporting and potentially
the entities to different data on incidents relevant
general multiple reporting
implementation entities / sectors authorities
systems
12 17 22 23 24 25 26 27 15
FIGURE 3 POTENTIAL BENEFITS LINKED TO FURTHER CENTRALISATION
4.2 Stakeholder Questionnaire
112. During Q3 2024, a questionnaire was distributed through the stakeholder groups of the
three ESAs to gather feedback from market participants on the key elements considered
for this feasibility report. Special emphasis was placed on the benefits and risks of each
of the different scenarios identified in DORA (and further explained in section 24).
30
113. Regarding the composition of the responses, the stakeholders’ groups of the three ESAs
participated in the process11, with representation from the following groups:
Financial Entities - Banking
1 1 Financial Entities - Markets
1 1
1 Professional Associations
Others
2 4
Financial Entities - Insurance
Academics
Small and Medium Enterprises
4
3
Employees
Consumers
FIGURE 4 STAKEHOLDERS REPRESENTED
114. A total of 18 individual responses were received, along with one aggregated response
from the Banking Stakeholders Group (BSG)12. One of the respondents belongs to both
the BSG and the SMSG. The professional associations represented include three at the
EU level and one at the Member State level.
115. An extended version of the analysis of the responses received can also be found in the
annex of the document. Here, we highlight the key benefits and risks associated with
each scenario, as well as the main conclusions.
Baseline -Benefits
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1. Low risk of 2. No or limited would be 3. Potential for 4. Aligned with needed) 5. NCAs as point6. No changes in7. Potential for 8. In general 9. Others
single points ofexposure to data available both atfaster response current legal of contact for notification secure data terms, the (please
failure concentration / national MS times from CAs framework of technical channels (from sharing benefits describe)
risks associated level and EU direct reporting questions FE to NCAs) mechanisms outweigh the
with “single level) to the with multiple risks identified
point of failure” competent use cases for more
(e.g. data authority (No centralized
DORA revision models.
11 Banking Stakeholders Group, Securities and Markets Stakeholders Group, Occupational Pensions Stakeholder Group and
Insurance and Reinsurance Stakeholder Group
12 The BSG's joint response to the questionnaire is included in the Annex.
31
Baseline -Risks
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1. Lack of standardized 2. Lack of efficiency in the 3. Greater need for 4. Higher risk of data quality 5. In general terms, the risks 6. Others (please describe)
reporting practices (multiple reporting (e.g. duplication of coordination and issues outweigh the benefits
systems) reporting flows from FEs) dissemination identified for more centralized
models.
FIGURE 5 BENEFITS AND RISKS - BASELINE
Data sharing -Benefits
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1. Balance between 2. Reduced exposure to 3. Potential for faster 4. NCAs as point of 5. No changes in 6. Potential for secure 7. Others (please
previous options data concentration risk / response times from CAs contact for technical notification channels data sharing mechanisms describe)
risks associated with questions (from FE to NCAs) with multiple use cases
‘single point of failure’
(e.g. related to
confidentiality, integrity
and availability of data)
Data sharing -Risks
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1. Lack of standardized reporting practices 2. Higher risk of data quality issues 3. Need for coordination and governance 4. Not exploiting the benefits of any of the
previous models
FIGURE 6 BENEFITS AND RISKS - DATA SHARING
32
Centralised Hub -Benefits
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1. Standardized 2. Simplified 3. Potential for 4. Higher 5. Potential for data 6. Potential cost 7. In general terms, 8. Potential for 9. Others (please
reporting practices reporting flows better data quality coordination and analysis saving the benefits secure data sharing describe)
management visualization of data outweigh the risks mechanisms with
identified for more multiple use cases
decentralized
models
Centralised Hub -Risks
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1. Increased exposure 2. Higher initial 3. Higher maintenance4. Need for centralised 5. Less flexibility to 6. Higher level of 7. In general terms, 8. Others (please
to data concentration implementation costs cost (including governance (incl. adapt current coordination needed the risks outweigh the describe)
risks / risks associated helpdesk and other IT access management) practices in the definition of benefits identified for
with ‘single point of support) reporting more decentralized
failure’ requirements (as the models
same CAs elaborate
reporting
requirements under
various regulations)
FIGURE 7 BENEFITS AND RISKS – CENTRALISED
33
Preferred Scenario
1. Baseline Scenario: a decentralised
model similar to the one described in
DORA
2
2. Data-Sharing : centralised system for all
Competent authorities with Financial
entities reporting to their respective
10 competent authorities.
7
3. Centralised HUB: Central HUB with
Financial entites reporting directly to the
HUB and all CAs having access to it.
FIGURE 8 PREFERRED SCENARIO
116. Members of the stakeholder groups were asked about their preferred scenario, and the
majority supported the most centralised model.
• Baseline Scenario: Least favourite option, only supported by two members
of the OPSG.
• Data-Sharing: This is seen as the best option by 7 different members, which
are part of three different stakeholder groups, SMSG, BSG and OPSG.
• Centralised HUB: This option is the one with more support, with 10 different
members expressing their preference for this scenario. A respondent opted
for either the Data-Sharing or the Centralised model. Members supporting
this model are members of three different stakeholder groups, OPSG, IRSG
and BSG.
34
5 High level business requirements
117. In conducting the feasibility study outlined by Article 21, various options for further
centralisation of the reporting of major ICT-related incidents can be considered. Despite
the diversity of potential approaches, there are likely to be common business
requirements that would underpin all these structures, enabling a standardised, efficient,
and secure incident reporting and management across the European Union. These
potential specifications, inferred from the regulatory requirements mentioned in the
regulation and from the views of the different competent authorities, would shape the
technical backbone of any such centralised system.
118. These requirements will serve as the foundation for evaluating the feasibility of further
consolidation and will inform subsequent stages of the study. The identified high-level
requirements will encompass both functional and non-functional aspects, taking into
account the needs of different stakeholders, regulatory compliance, scalability, and
technological considerations.
119. The following requirements should therefore be present in any of the options identified
within this study, as they are considered the essential elements from a business
requirements perspective.
120. The study will not delve into detailed technical requirements, as they are considered
beyond its scope. The requirements have been divided into functional and non-functional.
Functional requirements have been grouped according to the phases of the incident
reporting and analysis process13.
• Data Collection
Functional • Data assessment
Requirements • Data dissemination and notification
• Data analysis
• Security
Non-
• Performance
Functional
• Data retention
Requirements
• Compliance with standards
FIGURE 9: HIGH LEVEL FUNCTIONAL AND NON-FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
13 For the purpose of the identification of the business requirements, the “reporting entity” can be either a Financial Entity or
the CA, depending on the level of centralisation.
35
121. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
122. Data Collection
The solution shall support the collection of all versions of ICT-related incident
reports from the reporting entity in a timely manner (as defined in DORA and
1
RTS/ITS on Incident reporting), and at any rate in a very short timeframe (to be
agreed with CAs).
Each reporting entity shall be able to submit incident reports to the solution using
2 the templates, taxonomy and respective data point model developed based on the
RTS/ITS on Incidents reporting.
The solution shall identify and link the different messages related to every reported
3
incident as per Art 19 (4) of DORA.
The solution shall provide unique reference number and timestamp for all
4 submitted reports and link the reference numbers of subsequent reports (initial
notification, intermediate and final report) in line with Requirement 3.
The solution shall register the date and the time when the CA or FE (depending
5
on the reporting agent) reported the incident and track all actions taken on reports.
The solution shall allow unintentional or erroneous submissions to be cancelled,
6 modified, or reversed by the submitting CAs/FEs (depending on the reporting
agent) or system administrators.
The solution shall perform data validation checks against the taxonomy, technical
7 specifications set by the ESAs when implementing technical package for RTS/ITS
on Incident reporting or a predefined set of validations created ad hoc.
The solution shall acknowledge the reception of the incident to the reporting entity,
following the reception of a report/notification file, in very short timeframe. The
acknowledgement shall include the successful collection of the report or the need
to revise/resubmit the report, where the validation and completeness checks have
8 not been passed, (indicating the fields that didn’t pass the validation).
In relation to validation, this should happen immediately and in parallel to the
process of uploading the information into the system (i.e. at the moment this
information is available in the system, to avoid iteration loops as far as possible).
The solution shall support the ESAs in collecting significant cyber threats reports
from the reporting entity. (Although the notification of cyber threats is voluntary, it
9
is considered that any solution should be able to accommodate the reporting of
these threats)
10 The solution shall enable machine to machine reporting (e.g. through APIs) from
and to the systems of the reporting entity, as well as the possibility of manual
36
reporting (as some reporting entities will have less sophisticated IT systems). At
the same time the IR IT system shall support bulk file upload.
Data assessment
The solution shall support the manual and automated assessment of incident
reports in order to identify whether the major ICT-related incident is relevant to
11
stakeholders other than the reporting entity based on specific data fields from the
incident report.
The solution shall support rule-engines that can be enabled and configured
through pre-defined structured data fields to assess and disseminate incident
12
messages/information to relevant users in a timely manner (very short timeframe
to be agreed with CAs).
Data dissemination and notification
The solution shall allow forwarding or providing access to incident reports to
13
relevant stakeholders following the Data assessment phase.
The solution shall support the notification of the flagged reports to relevant
14 stakeholders and shall provide the stakeholders with access to them, including all
intermediate reports.
15 The solution shall allow the export of reports.
The solution shall facilitate the communication process among the different
16
stakeholders through specific communication channels.
Data analysis
The solution shall support manual and automated analysis of the incident data in
a way that allows using all reported data for the purposes of the preparation of the
17
annual report or to be used in sectorial risk assessment by the ESAs, in
accordance with Article 22.2 paragraph 1 of DORA.
The solution shall support the analysis of the incident data in a way that allows
using all reported data for the purposes of the ESAs issuing of warnings (the IT
18 system itself does not have to generate the warnings but support the process),
and the production of high-level statistics, in accordance with Article 22.2
paragraph 2 of DORA (e.g. through data visualisation).
NON - FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Security
37
Incident data to be classified and the solution shall treat it in accordance with the
19
relevant EU policies linked to this level of confidentiality.
The solution shall include a comprehensive user management system that allows
for seamless registration, authentication, authorisation, and profile management.
The solution system shall allow for managing access to the system and its data,
based on roles and responsibilities (for example, role-based access control,
including user profiles and user groups) for the different stakeholders (i.e. CAs,
ESAs, FEs, ECB). The solution shall allow each CA to maintain the details of the
FEs reporting to them and other data management tasks, including which other
20
authorities should receive reports submitted to them. The principle of least
privilege, where individuals have only the access necessary to perform their roles,
shall apply.
In the case of FEs having direct access to the system, the solution shall support
additional identity and access management complexity, since an important
number of different access profiles would need to be supported.
21 The solution shall ensure the integrity of the data.
22 The solution shall guarantee the availability of the data.
23 The solution shall maintain a high uptime.
The solution shall ensure that the personal data contained in the incident reports
24
is protected in line with the GDPR and EDPR requirements.
Performance
The solution shall be capable of handling a volume of incidents to be determined,
but it would likely scale to several thousand per year. The estimated volume could
25 be derived from actual volumes received prior to the implementation of the
solution. The number of cross-border incidents per year, which is estimated on a
best-efforts basis to be around 20% of total incidents reported
The solution shall provide quick response time, processing data in a timely manner
26
(timeframe to be agreed with CAs).
The solution shall accommodate future increases in reported incidents, ensuring
27 seamless expansion of functionalities, while supporting effective change
management processes
The system shall support a large number of users accessing the system, in the
28
order of several thousands
Data retention
38
Incident reporting files and other related data (audit logs, user data, etc.) shall be
29
maintained for 5 years.
Compliance with standards
The solution shall comply with generally accepted data reporting standards and
data communication protocols and should allow a consistent approach with data
30
reporting standards and communication protocols for ICT-related incident under
the Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2).
The solution shall comply with EU Web Accessibility Directive [Directive (EU)
31
2016/2102]
The solution should guarantee Interoperability, understood as the ability to
exchange and make use of information, whether it's data from financial entities,
32 national competent authorities, or other EU institutions. The solution should be
built using open standards and protocols, allowing it to interface effectively with
the variety of systems used by different stakeholders.
TABLE 1 HIGH LEVEL BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
39
6 Commercial solutions
123. Based on an initial high-level analysis, the market scan demonstrated that there may be
off-the-shelf commercial solutions that exist with a high degree of functional and non-
functional fit (see for details of these requirements chapter section 5). The ESAs and CAs
identified a total of 10 technological solutions with the potential to accommodate the
incident flow in DORA and its specifications. Four vendors responded to the Request for
Information (RfI).
Vendor A: ~25 employees
▪ The solution proposed offers an open-source enterprise-level ticket
management system. Organizations of all sizes use the solution to track and
manage workflows, customer requests, and internal project tasks of all
sorts. With seamless email integration, custom ticket lifecycles, configurable
automation, and detailed permissions and roles. The solution builds on all
the features and provides additional tools to correlate key data from incident
reports, find patterns and link incident reports, and manage communication
to multiple interested parties.
Vendor B: ~200 employees
▪ The vendor offers IT Service Management (ITSM) solutions. The Incident
Management solution has been developed in-line with the ITIL Best
Practices Framework and has been verified in Incident Management for IT
Service Management (ITSM). The solution covers functionalities such as
activity tracking on incident request, attaching multiple incidents to a
problem request, full traceability on all activities, sharing incident resolutions
with various stakeholders, etc.
Vendor C: ~500 employees
▪ The vendor offers cloud-based software specialised in risk management,
integrating governance, risk, compliance software and ethics & compliance
learning resources. The proposed solution allows organisation to improve
their speed and efficiency to report on, respond to, and resolve any incident.
It offers functionality such as multimodal incident reporting, automated end-
to-end investigations, real-time access to one central data repository.
Vendor D: >>10000 employees
▪ The vendor offers a cloud-based solutions. The proposed Incident
Management solution provides the necessary tools to identify and track
incidents and collaborates with the relevant involved parties. The solution
offers functionalities such as event monitoring, automation of repetitive
tasks, centralised workspace, broadcast communication for internal teams
and customers, reporting and dashboards, etc.
124. All vendors seem to offer strong capability coverage across the functional requirements,
most specifically in Data Collection, Data Dissemination and Notification. Based on the
available information the vendors were able to provide only rough (order of magnitude)
40
price indications – the indicative prices were ranging from 125k€ to 180k€ per year,
depending on the solution and the deployment method selected it refers to a service fee
or a recurring annual software maintenance fee. Based on the available information, 3
out of the 4 participating vendors estimate that the implementation of their solutions could
take up to 6 months what covers the setup and integration of the solution. One vendor
was not able/willing to provide an estimate based on the available information.
125. In the Request for Information (RfI), the vendors were asked to score their solutions
against the DORA requirements listed in chapter 5. The scores in the table below are
based on these vendors self-assessment and aggregated across all functional and non-
functional requirements which are equally weighted for the aggregation. 100% means the
requested requirements can completely be covered by the standard functionality provided
by the solution.
TABLE 2 COVERAGE OF FUNCTIONAL AND NON-FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
126. All solutions cover all functional and non-functional requirements - the difference between
the solutions is to which degree this is a standard functionality of the solution or how much
effort is needed to customise the solution for the use in the context of DORA. In general,
all solutions can cope with all functional and non-functional requirements according to the
vendors.
127. These results - the functional and non-functional coverage of the different solutions would
need to be validated with the vendors during workshops as a next step. The level of
granularity of the requirements used for the RfI was adapted to that of a feasibility study.
To pursue a more detailed and informed assessment in next phases of this endeavour
once a standard solution is sought, key use cases would need to be identified. In addition,
and in order to validate the RfI results and to conduct a Request for Proposal (RfP) the
following steps can be taken:
41
A g
S
S
S
S
g
S
o
o
o
o
r e g a
c o r e
lu tio n
lu tio n
lu tio n
lu tio n
t e
A
B
C
D
d
R
F
e
u n c t
q u ir e
8 7 %
1 0 0 %
1 0 0 %
1 0 0 %
io
m
n
e
a
n
l
t s
N
R
o n
e q
- F u n c
u ir e m
9 4 %
1 0 0 %
9 9 %
9 4 %
t io
e n
n
t
a
s
l
FIGURE 10 REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP) PROCESS 128.
42
7 Identification overview of potential options
129. This section identifies and presents three options:
− the baseline option, based on Article 19 and 22 of DORA and on input from the ongoing
work performed by the ESAs together with the CAs to enable incident reporting in
January 2025
− two potential options for further centralisation of incident reporting as defined in the
recital 55 of DORA: Data Sharing solution and Centralised Hub (EU Hub).
130. The following sections describe each of the identified options.
Baseline Data Centralised
Scenario Sharing EU Hub
FIGURE 11: OPTIONS CONSIDERED IN THIS REPORT
7.1 Baseline Scenario
131. The tasks assigned to the different stakeholders under DORA (see Incident reporting
under DORA) warranted coordinated work for incident reporting from the perspective of
the ESAs that could be ready during 2025. Based on this, the ESAs, in coordination with
the member states, the ECB, ENISA, and the SRB, are developing a joint tool to meet
the mandate established in Articles 19 and 22 of DORA which relates to facilitating
incident reporting from the competent authorities in the various member states to these
European authorities for relevant incident reports14. This system is under development at
the time of finalisation of the present feasibility study and will be considered the “Baseline
scenario”. 15
132. The Baseline Scenario is defined by the expected starting situation at the beginning of
the incident reporting under DORA in 2025. By this time, the ESAs will have implemented
a common tool to facilitate the reporting and dissemination of incidents from and to CAs.
Under this Baseline scenario CAs will receive the incidents directly from the FEs.
133. This tool has been developed as part of the CIRAS system operated by ENISA.
14 Incident reports are forwarded to other authorities based on their competence. All incident reports are not forwarded to
any single EU authority
15 The scenario is presented at a high level as defined for its implementation in 2025, without disregarding potential future
changes that could impact it (in terms of governance, data management, etc.).
43
134. Thus, the reporting flows are fundamentally based on those established in DORA with
the following modifications:
− The flow from the relevant competent authorities to the ESAs is common. That is, the
same system allows for the reception of such incidents, ensuring access to the relevant
ESA, depending on its competencies.
− This system, based on the information contained in the reported incident, is capable of
notifying other competent authorities in other member states. These competent
authorities can then access the system to consult or download the incident report.
135. The reporting flow from the competent authorities to the ECB is twofold:
− Credit institutions classified as significant, in accordance with Article 6(4) of Regulation
(EU) No 1024/2013, will report to the CAs, which will immediately transmit that report
to the ECB/SSM. The IT tool to accommodate this data flow is out of the scope of the
solution developed by ESAs.
− Incidents related to financial entities under Article 2(1), points (a), (b) and (d) will be
reported from the CAs to the ESAs System. This system will channel the reports to the
ECB.
136. The reporting flow from the competent authorities to the SRB is simplified, the SRB will
be notified in case an incident is related to Critical Functions directly from the ESAs
solution. This way, CAs avoid notifying the SRB in parallel, achieving a certain level of
centralisation.
FIGURE 12 BASELINE SCENARIO - DATA FLOWS
44
137. Under this scenario there is still a proliferation of incident reporting flows:
− There is potential parallel reporting at the FE level under Article 19(1) paragraph 6 and
Article 19(2) paragraph 3 (NIS2/SPOCs/CSIRTS authorities, represented by the green
arrow in the figure). At the same time, it is relevant to consider that the situation may
differ from one Member State to another, and can be avoided even in the baseline
scenario, as the double reporting to DORA NCAs and NIS2 is subject to the decision
at member state level, therefore the number of parallel reporting lines could be reduced.
− Potential parallel reporting at the group level of financial entities operating under the
supervision of different CAs. Under DORA, each FE is assigned for reporting purposes
to a single CA. However, for those groups of FEs supervised across multiple
geographies or sectors, there is a potential duplication in the flow of incidents. The
volume of incidents under this scenario is unknown at the time of drafting this report.
− There is identification of parallel onward transmission of reports by CAs to ESAs, ECB,
and other national authorities. Although the baseline scenario already includes a
certain degree of centralisation at the EU level, the CAs are required to forward the
same incident report (depending on their responsibilities) to the ESAs system, the ECB,
and/or other national authorities.
138. Regarding the graph shown above, the flows of data have been simplified at the member
state level, as the represented structure will need to be replicated in all countries.
139. It is relevant to emphasise that reporting flows from Financial Entities to CAs are carried
out under the systems and mechanisms implemented by said Competent Authorities. In
other words, there is no additional centralisation in this area, and each CA establishes
such mechanisms.
140. On the other hand, it is also important to note that the reporting will be based on what is
established in the RTS and ITS on content, timelines, and templates on incident
Reporting.
141. To delve into the standardisation of reporting, the competent authorities, in collaboration
with the ESAs, have developed the data model, validations, and other aspects related to
the Data management for the flow between CAs and the ESAs System.
142. Similarly, the competent authorities have also participated jointly with the ESAs, ENISA,
the ECB, and SRB in defining the business requirements for the solution implemented by
the ESAs and were also involved in other relevant deliverables of this project.
143. The baseline scenario presented in this study could be slightly different from what is
currently outlined, as it is still in the development phase, but the main characteristics and
the data flow could be considered stable.
7.2 Identification of alternatives for further centralisation
144. The identification of the various options for further centralisation of incident reporting was
based on the options already mentioned in DORA.
145. Firstly, in recital 55 of DORA, there is a reference to a model in which the relevant
competent authorities remain as the primary point of contact for financial entities, with the
HUB acting as a coordination mechanism, merely centralising relevant reports forwarded
45
by the national competent authorities. For the purposes of this study, we will refer to this
alternative as the "Data Sharing".
146. Furthermore, recital 55 and the first point of article 21 of DORA identifies a fully
centralised option through the establishment of a single EU Hub for major ICT-related
incidents where financial entities directly report to the EU Hub. For the purposes of this
study, we will refer to this alternative as the "Centralised Hub".
147. Other possible options not described in DORA were also considered but were initially
discarded after preliminary discussions among ESAs and CAs. These alternatives were
deemed unnecessary to pursue further, given that a high-level cost-benefit assessment
indicated that the two options already identified in DORA were sufficient.
7.2.1 Data Sharing Scenario
148. This scenario identifies an intermediate model of centralisation, combining elements from
the model established in DORA (and already included in the Baseline Scenario) with
elements included in the Centralised Hub, and is based on the second of the scenarios
identified in recital 55 of this regulation.
149. From DORA, it is extracted that Competent Authorities remain as the first point of contact
for incident reporting from Financial Entities. Additionally, the responsibility of transmitting
these reports to the Hub continues to stay with these competent authorities.
150. Centralisation occurs once the reports are reported to the Hub, which, acting as a
coordination mechanism, makes the information available to the various stakeholders
involved in the process.
151. Regarding the graph shown before, the flows of data represented at member state level
have been simplified, as the represented structure will need to be replicated in all
countries.
152. Under this scenario, the duplication of reporting flows is only maintained in the case of
those groups of FEs operating under the supervision of more than one NCA (due to
sectoral or geographical footprint reasons)
46
FIGURE 13 DATA SHARING SCENARIO - DATA FLOWS16
7.2.2 Centralised Hub Scenario
153. The Centralised Hub (single EU Hub) represents the most centralised model among the
considered alternatives and is fundamentally based on the mandate established under
Article 21 of DORA. This means a model where Financial Entities report directly to this
new Hub, and the rest of the stakeholders to be receiving notifications, access to reports
and consuming relevant information, based on their competences, through the Hub.
154. Such centralisation occurs both from the reporting and information dissemination
perspectives, but also at the level of analysis. Under this model, various stakeholders
would have access to centralised tools to assist in the analysis and follow-up processes.
Therefore, the model should ensure access to key individuals within each organisation.
For example, at the level of CAs, it should guarantee access to data and analytical tools
to supervisors responsible for monitoring and analysing the reported incidents.
155. Based on the above, the flow established for incident reporting under Article 19 of DORA
disappears and is replaced by a new model where all stakeholders, including Financial
16 The black arrows indicate the initial flow from the FEs or CAs. The red arrows indicate the notification or the possibility of
access to the data by the other stakeholders through the Data Sharing solution.
47
Entities, have access to the same information based on their competencies and
responsibilities.
FIGURE 14 CENTRALISED SCENARIO - DATA FLOWS17
7.3 Differences between the Baseline Scenario and the Data Sharing
Scenario
156. While the differences between the Baseline Scenario and the Centralised EU Hub
Scenario are more pronounced, the Baseline and Data Sharing Scenario are similar. To
facilitate the analysis, it is important to highlight the main two differences:
− The CAs that access the Data Sharing solution directly also could cover national NIS2
Authorities/SPOCs/CSIRTs hence the number of CAs having directly access is
expected to be higher compared to the Baseline Scenario
− In the Data Sharing Scenario, all stakeholders except the FEs have direct access to
the central solution for notification / dissemination purposes. This eliminates the need
to notify incidents at the national level (e.g., to national NIS2
Authorities/SPOCs/CSIRTs, NCBs as members of the ESCB in their capacity as
oversight authorities).). The same applies at the EU level, where in the Data Sharing
17 The black arrow indicates the initial flow from the FEs. The red arrows indicate the notification or the possibility of access
to the data by the other stakeholders through the HUB.
48
Scenario, all competent authorities at the European level consume information from
the central solution.
49
8 Assessment
157. This section encompasses the limitations in the assessment performed, the identification
of the elements considered for evaluation, a high-level cost-benefit analysis, and
additional considerations for the potential implementation of scenarios beyond the
baseline.
8.1 Limitations
158. With the information available, at the drafting of this report, conducting a detailed
assessment for the three scenarios is highly complex. For example, even for the baseline
scenario, currently under development, a more precise cost analysis is relatively difficult
to obtain considering the different types of IT implementation in the different CAs and the
current phase of the ongoing developments. Producing a comprehensive assessment
and breakdown of the total costs for the data-sharing and centralised scenarios proves
to be even more challenging due to the high uncertainty regarding factors that would
impact such assessment and cost calculation. Nonetheless, the assessment performed,
and the cost estimation are critical to the feasibility of each scenario—and therefore to
the conclusions of this document. Additionally, identifying the primary cost areas is
valuable for outlining financial implications.
159. Specifically, below we have identified the numerous variables (known unknowns) that
could significantly alter the overall assessment and costs of centralisation, both at the
ESA/EU and NCA level.
− Unknown specific design and development needs: Detailed design and functional
requirements of the centralised approach cannot be more precise at this stage, than
the analysis made above on the different requirements. This makes the cost calculation
of the development effort quite abstract. This includes key design elements such as
system technical design, system integrations and interdependencies, specific
information security design aspects, amongst others, all of which could result in
variations in complexity and cost.
− Unknown number of total incidents: currently we do not have a stable estimate on
the number of incidents that would be reported, as this would be the first time such
reporting will take place. We are also unclear on the proliferation of parallel channels
(please refer to par. 137) of reporting, the reporting and management of which could
indeed increase the costs of decentralised solutions depending on the frequency of
such reports.
− Legal and regulatory considerations: there is a dependency on the key legal
changes that could potentially influence the design of the proposed approach.
− Interoperability with NCAs IT systems used for supervisory response and follow-
up: Each NCA operates unique systems with varying degrees of technical complexity,
integration, sophistication and automation. And some NCAs may not operate any
system and rely on manual submissions (e.g. via secure email). While reporting
systems at NCAs may not be needed if reporting is centralised, NCAs may still need to
integrate into the centralised solution any systems / functionalities of the system they
use to conduct supervisory response and follow-up on major incidents (e.g. GRC
systems). This could involve vastly different levels of effort and will increase the
complexity in the design of such a centralised solution, as well as implementation.
50
− Unknown timelines: The lack of a detailed and concrete timeline creates uncertainty
in terms of costs, planning, budgeting, resource allocation, and governance needs.
− Ongoing costing: Centralised models will lead to duplication of some technical, data
and operational elements already present in the various CAs for other analogous
reporting processes, as well as to continuous governance and maintenance.
8.2 Assessment areas
160. The mandate under Article 21 of DORA sets out the minimum elements to be considered
in the feasibility study, namely its paragraph 2, points (a) to (g), lists 7 elements on which
the feasibility study should at least elaborate. However, it is necessary to clarify them in
more detail, to be able to establish an effective analysis and comparison of the different
options considered.
161. The tables below further elaborate on the key elements considered in the evaluation of
each of the criteria identified in Article 21(2) of DORA and its assessment. An additional
analysis of each of these elements for each of the identified scenarios, elaborated by an
independent expert (i.e. Gartner Consulting), is included in the Annex I: Assessment
summary - .
Article 21(2)(a) Prerequisites for the establishment of a single EU Hub
Infrastructure and Technology Requirements: The initial technological requirements enabling the scenario, vary
significantly, particularly in terms of the hardware and software needed from day one. These requirements depend on the
desired level of centralisation and the necessary connectivity between the various stakeholders and the technological solutions
they need to be connected to. In the context of these requirements, potential proliferation of IT systems serving the same
purpose, as well as potential duplications were considered as factors.
In general terms, the prerequisite is to ensure that competent authorities are provided with pertinent information without delay
(e.g. requirements for an immediate and automatic alert and synchronisation in the access to incident), this is identified as a
priority for each of the scenarios outlined given their supervisory responsibilities for incident response.
In this context, a cloud computing -based implementation is considered appropriate, considering the requirements of the
baseline solution, which is currently under implementation. The implementation should allow to have access without delays to
the right data.
Information Security requirements: In addition, in all scenarios, strong information security requirements are needed, to
ensure confidentiality, integrity and availability of the reported data. The dataset has already been classified as Sensitive non-
classified information for the purposes of the baseline scenario, and the ESAs would need to ensure compliance with the
Cybersecurity Regulation at the institutions, bodies, offices, and agencies of the Union18. While, the fully centralised scenario
is expected to have higher risks related mostly to the availability of the incident reporting information, all scenarios would
require comprehensive information security controls in place, particularly but not limited to the identify and access
management, to minimise the risks of unauthorised access, disclosure and/or modification of data. This is because even in the
case of the baseline scenario, the information will be stored at national systems but also in a centralised database (ESAs hub).
Governance of centralisation (who host and manage the solution): While at the moment of drafting this feasibility report,
it is not yet decided which EU body will store the data in their systems, at the same time two options are considered currently:
an ESA’s system, as well as ENISA, which will need to host similar dataset for other incident reporting regimes. Both options
provide for solid implementations, considering technical prerequisites and information security requirements as identified
above.
Legal prerequisites: the necessary regulatory changes under DORA (as it forms the basis of the mandate) are considered,
including some details on the specific articles and provisions that may need to be amended. The assessment took into
consideration that the baseline scenario does not require changes to the legal framework. The Data-sharing scenario would
require some minor changes, in particular with regard to reporting to NIS authorities. The centralised solution would require
amendments to DORA and Level 2 regulation. Namely, legal changes required under the centralised solution, although not
18 Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2023/2841 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 laying down
measures for a high common level of cybersecurity at the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union.
51
Article 21(2)(a) Prerequisites for the establishment of a single EU Hub
numerous in quantitative terms, will impact the current data flows from the FEs to the CAs, constituting a significant change in
the existing process. Similarly, to fully leverage the benefits of the centralised solution, the aggregated incident reporting (a
single report for incidents with cross-sector and cross-Member State impact) should be regulated (the aggregated reporting is
only partially developed in Article 7 of the ITS in accordance with Article 20, first subparagraph, point (b) of DORA, hereinafter
the ‘ITS on forms, templates, and procedures’), the need for an agreement on these arrangements, particularly concerning the
aggregated reporting, can also be considered a potential risk, as the successful implementation, particularly concerning the
aggregated reporting, can also be considered a potential risk, as the successful implementation of such changes depends on
achieving consensus among relevant stakeholders. Additionally, changes are needed in the legal provisions for alternative
reporting mechanisms in cases of technical unavailability. The legal assessment has not considered potential legal changes,
if any, for any of the scenarios at the Member State level.
Article 21(2)(b) Benefits, limitations and risks, including risks associated with the high
concentration of sensitive information
This point is relatively heterogeneous; therefore, the assessment has been divided among the various elements included in
the mandate. Here, we focus on the most relevant elements, with further elaboration provided in the annex.
In the baseline scenario, the focus of the assessment is on utilising the existing systems and processes of the CAs, along with
the investments made to adapt to DORA, particularly in the short term. Regarding the other scenarios, it has been considered
that the centralised scenario involves the creation and maintenance of a single infrastructure, which will involve additional costs
to establish but could potentially result in economies of scale and efficiency for some stakeholders (e.g. groups of financial
entities that report in more than one Member State,)) over the medium to long term. In this scenario, CAs will still operate
reporting systems for different purposes/reporting frameworks. The data-sharing scenario emphasises the potential reuse of
the CAs' systems and could be implemented as an expansion of the baseline. scenario. Equally important is the data flow
between stakeholders. The flows from FEs and CAs have been considered and any changes to them, depending on the
approach used.
In terms of supervisory convergence, the degree of standardisation increases with the centralisation of reporting. All scenarios
(including the baseline) allow for standardisation (through taxonomies, formats, standardised validations)), but this
standardisation becomes more evident as the centralisation of the flow increases. It has been also considered how the different
levels of centralisation have the potential to generate inconsistent and asynchronous databases and the possibilities for
allowing for an enhanced market overview through a consolidated database.
Identified limitations: In the centralised scenario, the CAs are no longer the first point of contact for the FEs and in some
cases possible specificities relevant to them in the reporting flow may be lost. In the non-centralised scenarios, the limitation
lies in the possible delays in accessing and consolidating information due to the two-stage process and the need for the Groups
of FEs that report in a number of Member States or under different sectors to report through different systems. Language
barriers should also be considered for all three scenarios, with relative advantages in the baseline model due to maintaining
current reporting flows.
Risk Identification: At the operational and technical level, there are risks linked to the possible duplication of information and
systems and lack of harmonisation on information security controls. Linked to this is the risk of data concentration and single
point of failure in the centralised model, which should be mitigated with appropriate measures. This risk does not disappear
completely in the decentralised models, as some information is still kept at the centralised (ESAs) and decentralised levels.
Reputational risk, as the whole process takes place centrally, is the highest in the centralised scenario. Finally, the risk of
delays in the consolidation of information from different sources in the decentralised models is reduced in the centralised model
with only one reporting step in the process. Risk, though the ability of DORA and NIS competent authorities to escalate and
respond in a timely manner might be less in a centralised scenario.
Article 21(2)(c) The necessary capability to ensure interoperability with regard to
other relevant reporting schemes
Technical compatibility and existing systems: the assessment has considered a variation in interoperability in the baseline
scenario for CAs. In the baseline scenario the CAs should connect to several solutions depending on the stakeholder to whom
they shall notify incidents (ESAs, ECB, and if necessary other competent authorities at national level), in the data-sharing and
centralised model, the need to connect to multiple systems is reduced to a single system. FEs should connect to the DORA
CA (to multiple DORA CAs in case of Groups of FEs or parallel reporting to NIS authorities as identified in par 137) in the
decentralised scenarios, and directly to the EU Hub in the centralised scenario. It is important to emphasise that the centralised
scenario could allow CAs to access and consume/analyse the relevant information for their internal use.
52
Data sharing and harmonisation: in the Baseline and Data sharing scenarios, it is managed by the CAs in collaboration with
the ESAs (and can be improved through detailed taxonomies, validations, etc.) with possible difficulties due to the two-step
process and the different reporting pathways. In the centralised scenario it is managed in a single step.
Article 21(2)(d) Elements of operational management
Governance Structure: The complexity of the governance models for each of the scenarios has been considered. In the
centralised model at EU level, the management of all FEs accessing the systems could concentrate the complexity in one
central solution and could introduce a complex governance model as the underlying system is decentralised. Management of
FEs still remains in decentralised (at MS/CA level) scenarios with potentiality of duplications.
Data Management Procedures: Data management procedures are duplicated in both Baseline and Data-sharing. Data
management procedures are more complex in the centralised model.
Quality Assurance Measures: Two-stage heterogenous data quality assurance process established at national level by CAs
and at EU level by the ESAs (it can be mitigated with taxonomy, validations, etc.).
Article 21(2)(e) Conditions of membership
Eligibility Criteria (type of stakeholder that can get access to the centralised EU solution): the main difference is that in the
centralised scenario the FEs are also eligible and can also access the system (for both reporting and potentially consumption
of data). This is not the case for the other scenarios, as it would potentially eliminate the benefits associated with
decentralisation. The data-sharing and centralised hub allows a greater number of CAs at both EU and national level to access
information.
Membership Application: under all three scenarios the CAs will have to apply for membership of the jointly operated solution.
In the data-sharing and the centralised model, the number of staff of CAs accessing the single solution is higher, in the
centralised scenario, the access could be for both reporting and analytical/supervisory purposes so the number of users will
be increased. In the baseline scenario, CAs should connect for reporting purposes to several IT solutions, it is also assumed
that the users of the CAs have access to the IT solutions operated by the CAs themselves. The main difference lies treatment
reporting modalities for FEs, where for the centralised scenario, the FEs will report directly to a single solution in a centralised
system, while in the other two more de-centralised scenarios, the FEs report into the different national systems set up for
incident reporting or according to the reporting instructions of each NCA. The potential for heterogeneity in reporting systems
among FEs across different countries in decentralised models has also been analysed.
Technical standards should specify the modalities and operational standards for the CAs to access the centralised HUB and
the terms and conditions, the arrangements, and the required documentation under which access to a centralised EU Hub is
granted. The conditions of membership of FEs should be also elaborated.
Authorisation process: Consideration given to the different degree of complexity and effort in the authorisation process for
the FEs. In the centralised model managed centrally, with support from CAs, and in the other scenarios the authorisation will
only need to be carried out by CAs.
Potential membership cost: potentially higher in decentralised models because of possible duplication, although even in the
fully centralised scenario CAs will continue to operate systems for other purposes outside DORA Incident reporting.
53
Article 21(2)(f) Technical arrangements for financial entities and national competent
authorities to access the single EU Hub
Identity & Access Management (IAM)
Access by CAs: In the Centralised model CAs only have to access the HUB and there is no need to connect to other CAs'
systems (at least for sharing in the context of DORA). It should be mentioned that the access should be for all those relevant
members of the staff of the CAs, including supervisors, in the centralised model. Thereby, it should be ensured that CAs only
have access to incident reports of financial entities they supervise. Moreover, while horizontal supervisors may have access
to all incident reports of entities under the supervision of their CA, competent supervisors of one or multiple FEs only have
access to incidents reports of FEs they supervise.
Access by FEs: the IAM of FEs is a relevant and clearly differentiating factor between the different scenarios, the obvious
difference being the need to manage access identification in a centralised or decentralised manner. There are arguments for
both approaches, the difficulties derived from doing it centrally for a very large number of FEs should not be underestimated,
while such centralisation allows for greater uniformity in the process and the security standards adopted. Similar arguments in
the opposite direction apply for decentralised models.
Role-based access control and authorisation credentials: the elements to be considered are similar to those of the previous
point with some caveats. Although the process is more standardised at the centralised level, the FEs should continue to be
registered in the national systems. The different of roles increase with centralisation as more stakeholders need to be
onboarded, apart from CAs, ECB and SRB therefore also increases the complexity of the IAM implementation and operation
On the other hand, the centralised model allows standardising the process for groups of FEs operating in different member
states or under different sectors, while a strong IAM implementation is warranted for all there scenarios, given the nature of
the dataset, as mentioned under the information security prerequisites (Article 21(2)(a))
Article 21(2)(g): Preliminary assessment of financial costs incurred by setting-up the
operational platform supporting the single EU Hub, including the requisite expertise
Platform cost (set-up/maintenance): in decentralised models such costs are incurred at both CAs and EU level, the data-
sharing model allows other CAs (at Member State and EU level) to rely on the hub and avoid associated costs. Please refer
to section 8.3.2.
Expertise capacity building: There are few differences at the business level, however at the technical level capacities should
exist at national and EU level for decentralised models (although these may be mitigated by existing knowledge to operate
current systems).
TABLE 3 ELEMENTS BASED ON DORA ART. 21 COVERED IN THE ANALYSIS OF THE SCENARIOS
8.3 High-level cost identification
162. Having highlighted the known unknowns, the report provides a high-level cost
assessment identifying the primary cost areas and outlining key financial implications
based on the information known to the ESAs at this stage, including data shared by CAs,
assumptions made, and projections from similar solutions at ESAs level.
163. The assessment is performed both in absolute (Section 8.3.1) and relative cost terms
(Section 8.3.2) and highlights the main cost lines related to the high-level business
requirements listed in Section Error! Reference source not found.. The costs are
specified in implementation (CAPEX) and running/maintenance costs (OPEX) and are
based on specific assumptions, which are presented in the next sections.
54
8.3.1 High-level cost estimates in absolute terms
164. The table in this section highlights all the high-level costs estimations in absolute terms.
This means that the total expense associated with each of the specific scenarios is
considered as if they were independent projects to be decided upon at the outset of this
exercise. The estimates are based on the following assumptions:
− Operational costs: the operational cost is calculated consistently for all three
scenarios, as a fixed percentage of the CAPEX costs.
− Sunk costs: sunk costs are considered irrelevant for the cost’s estimations in absolute
terms since they are an expense that has already been incurred and cannot be
recovered. It should be however factored in for the calculation of the cost estimates in
relative terms, and thus considered in the conclusion of the total cost assessment.
− Baseline scenario: the baseline scenario estimates are based on the costs incurred
by the ESAs in developing their joint solution, as well as extrapolations drawn from
information shared by several CAs and ECB.
− Data-sharing scenario: the data-sharing scenario identifies a higher cost for the ESAs
in relation to the baseline scenario. This is driven by the larger number of stakeholders
involved and the additional design requirements necessary to accommodate the
expanded scope of the scenario. At the MS level, the CAPEX, and consequently the
OPEX, costs are reduced compared to the baseline scenario, as some of the
associated responsibilities also disappear, there is no need for the CAs to establish
mechanisms for proper routing or dissemination to multiple stakeholders; all the
information received is channeled into a single system.
− Centralised scenario: cost estimates in the centralised scenario are based on
assumptions regarding the number of stakeholders, expected incident volumes,
insights gathered during the request for information (please refer to section 6), and the
ESAs’ experience with similar projects implemented in the past. The requirements and
prerequisites of this scenario eliminate the need for collecting, assessing, routing, and
disseminating reports at MS level; therefore, no costs at CAs level are identified related
to the implementation of the high-level business requirements identified in the section
5 of this report. However, it should be noted that additional costs for local copies of
incidents reported at national level would be only related to DORA supervisory
activities, e.g. response, analysis, and follow-up, and such additional capabilities would
be analogous for other scenarios. Therefore, no additional CAPEX is identified.
55
Type of cost on
Baseline Data-sharing Centralised
High level business requirement
ESAs System 400,000 € 600,000 €
9,500,000 €
Implementation (CAPEX)
CA Level 11,300,000 € 8,700,000 €
Total CAPEX 11,700,000 € 9,300,000 € 9,500,000 €
ESAs System 80,000 € 120,000 €
1,900,000 €
Maintenance (OPEX)
CAs 2,260,000 € 1,740,000 €
Total OPEX/year 2,340,000 € 1,860,000 € 1,900,000 €
165. With these assumptions, the three solutions have similar costs range in absolute terms
for both CAPEX and OPEX. Nevertheless, the baseline solution is slightly more
expensive, in absolute terms, primarily due to the proliferation of systems at both the MS
and EU levels, as well as the expanded duplicated capabilities of these systems and the
need to operate them simultaneously, while the data sharing and centralised solutions as
assessed as very close for both one-off setup and recurring maintenance costs. Although
absolute costs are presented for comparative purposes, it should be noted that the
baseline scenario represents sunk costs in the event of a migration to one of the
additional scenarios, as explained in the next section.
56
8.3.2 Cost estimates in relative terms
166. The costs estimate in relative terms for the data sharing and centralised solutions should
consider that the costs foreseen for the baseline scenario are already incurred, thus
cannot be recovered.
167. With these assumptions and considering the sunk costs for the actual implementation,
the centralised scenario seems to be the most expensive in relative terms, given that
potential saving opportunities on yearly OPEX would materialize only in the long term, if
ever (e.g. more than 20 years after the setup).
168. Hence, in that context it appears that the data sharing scenario is more cost effective,
taking into consideration its’ possible implementation as incremental improvements of the
baseline scenario.
8.3.3 Additional cost considerations
8.3.3.1 BASELINE
169. The efforts already made to gather the business requirements and to select the Baseline
Solution should also be considered, which add up to the total cost for the implementation
of the Baseline Scenario. These costs will imply a better understanding of possible future
needs and are therefore likely to reduce development costs in the other alternatives.
• In addition, the Baseline Solution needs help desk support in all CAs at both MS and
EU level and additional second level support.
• At national level some jurisdictions may need to set-up new or adapt existing systems
and maintain these systems in parallel. Also, the related necessary expertise capacity
needs to be built, for those jurisdictions that don’t have such systems. At the same time,
it is expected that some jurisdictions may operate more manual modalities for receiving
reports from FEs, as the number of incidents reported might not be high and a
development of a dedicated tool would be unnecessary.
8.3.3.2 DATA SHARING
170. The Data Sharing Solution needs one help desk support and additional second level
support.
• At national level some jurisdictions may need to set-up new or adapt existing systems
and maintain these systems in parallel. Also, the related necessary expertise capacity
needs to be built, for those jurisdictions that don’t have such systems. At the same
time, it is expected that some jurisdictions may operate more manual modalities for
receiving reports from FEs, as the number of incidents reported might not be high and
a development of a dedicated tool would be unnecessary.
57
8.3.3.3 CENTRALISED
171. The high cost associated with implementing the centralised solution arises from the
onboarding of several thousand financial entities within scope and additional number of
staff from CAs. Estimates are based on past onboarding processes for centralised
solutions. However, the possibility to use innovative solutions for managing
organisational credentials for financial institutions, like vLEI, which could significantly
reduce the onboarding costs for the single EU hub, would also need to be explored. In
the report, the figures are based on past ESAs data reporting projects, from where we
drew the data available to support these estimates. Nonetheless, recent experiences in
this area help quantify potential cost reductions associated with using this technology.
• In addition, the Centralised EU Hub needs only one help desk support in all EU
languages and additional second level support.
• At national level, CAs will need to integrate their supervisory systems to the
centralised system and build the related necessary expertise. At the same time, we
expect that some jurisdictions may adapt more manual modalities for receiving reports
from FEs, as the number of incidents reported is not high and a development of a
dedicated tool would be an overkill.
8.4 High-level Cost Benefit Analysis
172. The following paragraphs present a high-level cost-benefit analysis of the different
scenarios, incorporating perspectives from various actors, including stakeholders, ESAs,
CAs and the independent assessment performed by Gartner Consulting. This analysis
aims to capture the diverse viewpoints and feedback provided, recognising that each
group has different perspectives, needs, priorities, and risks.
173. The identification of the elements for assessment mentioned in the previous chapter,
along with the input gathered from two questionnaire consultations sent to the CAs and
stakeholder groups (see section Stock-taking and stakeholder consultation), form the
foundation of this analysis. Additionally, discussions held within the context of the DORA
working groups further enriched this comprehensive evaluation.
174. The cost benefit analysis lists and performs a qualitative comparison of the associated
benefits and costs/challenges. The cost/challenges considerations are based on the
steady state costs
58
BENEFITS
BASELINE DATA-SHARING CENTRALISED
▪ Minimum disruption: Established data collection process and ▪ Smooth transition and low disruption: The scenario can be ▪ Better alignment with the objectives linked to a Savings and
existing systems may be re-used. The systems adapted or implemented as an extension of the existing baseline framework Investments Union.
developed for reporting under other mandates in force, as well as and can integrate more effectively with the solutions currently in ▪ Establishing deeper alignment with harmonisation objectives
their associated processes, can be preserved. place at national level, while offering some additional centralisation of DORA (DORA recitals 8 to 16).
▪ Limited to no additional implementation cost as systems built of reporting into the ESAs single hub. It may also provide a ▪ Enhanced EU level cybersecurity preparedness, coordination
for initial DORA implementation. smoother transition as an intermediate solution to the centralised and response through advanced analytical capabilities: while
▪ No DORA amendments are needed: this model can operate option while maximizing the benefits of the baseline. analytical capabilities can be provided in other models, the
without modifications to either DORA Level 1 or Level 2. ▪ Minimum disruption: By maintaining the flows between CAs and potential is greater in a system where all stakeholders are
▪ CAs remain the first point of contact for FEs under their FEs, some of the established data collection process and systems involved, and the database is consistent and synchronized.
supervision: this brings benefits related to the familiarity with the may be re-used. The systems adapted or developed for reporting ▪ A unified and consistent incident reporting process and
CA reporting framework and language or quicker under other mandates in force, as well as their associated standards across the EU, facilitated by a single unique
scalability/response at CAs / national level. Any potential processes, can be preserved. system: This ensures streamlined collection and dissemination
centralised applications at the Member State level—such as ▪ Limited additional implementation cost since it does not for all stakeholders, irrespective of sector or Member State,
national hubs—are also retained. represent a significant change in the first phase of reporting (FEs promoting greater efficiency and alignment.
▪ High concentration of sensitive information: Regarding the → CAs). ▪ Limited data collection delays: The system offers temporal
risks associated with the high concentration of sensitive ▪ Some potential economies of scale at national level by synchronisation at the information level, eliminating risks of delays
information (as per Article 21(2)(b)), the analysis showed that in avoiding the need for additional disseminations, both at member or inconsistencies from various reporting sources, ensuring timely
this scenario the risk of losing availability of the incident data is state and at the EU level which also makes it more cost effective data across the board.
lower than that of the centralised scenario, as this data would also than the fully centralised option, as per the analysis in Section ▪ Limited data inconsistencies: A unified, consistent database for
exist in the national systems. At the same time, the risk of 8.3.2. all European incident reports ensures that data is collected and
unauthorised access and disclosure due to concentration still ▪ CAs remain as the first point of contact for FEs under their managed according to a common standard, providing clarity and
exists for this scenario and is similar to that of the Centralised Hub, supervision: This brings benefits related to the familiarity with the alignment across all stakeholders.
as the baseline is implemented through a single ESAs hub which CA reporting framework and language or quicker ▪ Potentially greater economies of scale compared to the
will receive, store and disseminate the incident reports. scalability/response at CAs level. baseline solution, in the long run (please refer to Table 5). At the
▪ High concentration of sensitive information: Regarding the same time, this is attenuated considering the expense ESAs/CAs
risks associated with the high concentration of sensitive already had to incur to implement a solution enabling incident
information (as per Article 21(2)(b)), the analysis showed that in reporting in January 2025, as well as considering CAs would still
this scenario the risk of losing availability of the incident data is need to implement solutions at national level for supervisory
lower than that of the centralised scenario, as this data would also response and follow-up.
exist in the national systems. At the same time, the risk of ▪ Reduced data dissemination times, through a one-step data
unauthorised access and disclosure due to concentration still collection process that make the data available for all relevant CAs
exists for this scenario and is similar to that of the Centralised Hub, at the same time.
as the Data Sharing is implemented through a single ESAs hub ▪ Shorter response time for cross-border incidents, linked to the
which will receive, store and disseminate the incident reports. previous point, the ability to have consolidated and synchronised
information allows for a shorter response time in the case of
incidents occurring across multiple Member States. (temporal
synchronization and content harmonization capabilities)
59
BENEFITS
BASELINE DATA-SHARING CENTRALISED
▪ Opportunity to provide access to FEs: the onboarding of FEs
and consolidated database allow to provide access to European
wide incident reporting data, with the appropriate security
measures. In line with the EIOPA Strategy on Cyber Underwriting
approved by the EIOPA Board of Supervisors in 202019.
TABLE 4 CBA: BENEFITS
− Future reduction or elimination or specific system adaptations for receiving and sending reports across all CAs involved in the process (which could be hundreds), even though the marginal
cost to incorporate DORA reporting in the current systems reduced.
− Elimination of duplicate reporting flows to various stakeholders (this applies to NCAs as well as ESAs and other CAs at both national and European levels).
− Elimination of double reporting by groups of FEs (in cases of group-level or aggregated reporting).
− Overall operational costs, based on the estimation that overall, the operation of a single system is expected to be less costly than various systems at national level even if the implementation
are more costly.
− Scalability: a centralised solution is easier to scale and modify, if necessary, Changes are implemented centrally, providing an easier expansion in capability, reduced incremental cost to
escalate, uniform modifications and easier training and onboarding.
− Costs associated with quality: centralised and standardised solutions are more efficient in managing data quality and corrections, while the nature of more decentralised solutions would
warrant duplicate cost for data quality purposes (e.g. data quality for x systems at EU level, as opposed to one).
− Consolidation in the visualisation of global data, which can facilitate related decision-making and faster response time through streamlined access to the data and reduced analysis time.
− Estimated economies of scale related to information security in general, linked to lower per-user-cost, lower operational/maintenance expenses and single cost-efficient implementation.
− Compliance cost: FEs and CAs operating a single system/process for all jurisdictions or sectors, reducing the need for specialised personnel, training, auditing and administrative overhead
TABLE 5 ECONOMIES OF SCALE FOR CENTRALISED MODEL
19 EIOPA Strategy on Cyber Underwriting approved by the EIOPA Board of Supervisors in 2020 “" In order to allow for sound pricing, underwriting and cyber risk management, the
availability of data on cyber incidents should be broadened and appropriately standardised, while safeguarding the level playing field and data confidentiality. Ultimately, the access to cyber
incident database(s), potentially a European Database, could be seen as a public good and underpin the further development of the European cyber insurance industry and act as an enabler of
the digital economy"”
60
COSTS / CHALLENGES
BASELINE DATA-SHARING CENTRALISED
▪ Duplication / proliferation of incident reporting data flows ▪ Reduced incident reporting flows compared to the ▪ Implementation costs: a complex system that requires
as presented in par 137: CAs would submit to ESAs, and other baseline, while still multiple reporting flows are maintained, for onboarding of all CAs, ’CAs’ supervisors (at least for the
national authorities, while groups of FEs supervised by different example some FEs will be reporting to several CAs. financial sector) and FEs, in addition to the resources that would
CAs will need to report to several CAs. have been spent already for the baseline scenario. Particular
▪ Heterogeneity and proliferation of ICT-related incident
cost points are the sophisticated identity & access management
▪ Higher Maintenance Costs: maintaining multiple systems reporting systems across the EU: different national
modules, and information security controls and arrangements
across the EU, leading to increased spending compared to a authorities will operate different systems for collecting and
that would need to be implemented, the operational costs,
single, centralised system. disseminating major ICT-related incidents. Many different
including the onboarding of many authorities and industry
systems will exist in the EU and within the EU member states,
▪ Heterogeneity and proliferation of ICT-related incident stakeholders, setting up helpdesk in different languages to
on top of the ESAs single Hub (baseline).
reporting systems across the EU: different national support and the costs to accommodate the specific needs of the
authorities will operate different systems for collecting and ▪ Legal basis should be created first: the Data-sharing scenario various CAs (both at the level of connectivity to national systems
disseminating major ICT-related incidents. Many different will require some minor modifications in the legal framework (if necessary), the analytical and monitoring capabilities
systems will exist in the EU and within the EU member states, (mostly relating to the notifications to competent authorities). required) and multi-language helpdesk. At the same time, we
on top of the ESAs single Hub (baseline). expect economies of scale to be achieved in the maintenance
▪ Different points of contacts for reporting purposes: there is costs spent on such solutions in the EU level.
▪ Delayed information sharing: the two-step reporting process an increase on the operational costs related to the management
generates delays in completing the data collection and and communication with different point of contacts for reporting ▪ Sunk costs: considering the sunk costs for the actual
dissemination to all stakeholders and/or longer response times purposes (reduced compared to the Baseline) implementation, the centralised scenario seems to be the most
At the same time, this can be mitigated in the event of M2M expensive in relative terms, given that potential saving
implementation across all CAs. This is particularly important for ▪ Reduced compared to the baseline but still delayed opportunities on yearly OPEX would materialize only in the long
incidents impacting multiple EU Member States information sharing: the two-step reporting process generates term.
delays in completing the data collection and dissemination to all
▪ Higher risk of data inconsistencies and low data quality: stakeholders and/or longer response times. This is particularly ▪ Both at level 1 and level 2 legal basis should be created
The proliferation of information flown, systems, reports, and data important for incidents impacting multiple EU Member States first: The centralised solution would require amendments to
quality processes can potentially create inconsistencies in the Article 19 of DORA and to the ITS on forms, templates, and
information. At the same time, this can be mitigated with shared ▪ Reduced compared to the Baseline but still risk of data procedures to shift from the current reporting system to the
taxonomies). inconsistencies and low data quality: The proliferation of central hub. To fully exploit the benefits of the centralised model,
information flows, systems, reports, and data quality processes DORA amendments are needed to enable aggregated incident
▪ Different points of contacts for DORA incident reporting can potentially create inconsistencies in the information. At the reporting at the cross-sector and cross-Member State level
purposes: there is an increase on the operational costs related same time, it can be mitigated with shared taxonomies.
to the management and communication with different point of ▪ High concentration of sensitive information and Single
contacts for reporting purposes. ▪ Maintaining Different Reporting Standards: In a Point of Failure: Regarding the risks associated with the high
decentralised model, different jurisdictions may require varying concentration of sensitive information (as per Article 21(2)(b)),
▪ Maintaining Different Reporting Standards: In a reporting standards, which increases complexity and costs. the analysis showed that in this scenario the risk of losing
decentralised model, different jurisdictions may require varying Even with efforts to minimise these differences through a shared availability of the incident data is the highest than on the other
reporting standards, which increases complexity and costs. data model, variations in data formats could persist. This scenarios, as this data would only be available at centralised
Even with efforts to minimize these differences through a shared requires additional resources to manage and integrate diverse level. At the same time, the risk of unauthorised access and
data model, variations in data formats could persist. This standards, including system customisations, staff training, and
61
COSTS / CHALLENGES
BASELINE DATA-SHARING CENTRALISED
requires additional resources to manage and integrate diverse data reconciliation efforts. Over time, this can lead to increased disclosure due to concentration still exists for this scenario and
standards, including system customizations, staff training, and operational and compliance costs, as well as inefficiencies in is similar to that of the Baseline and Data Sharing scenarios.
data reconciliation efforts. Over time, this can lead to increased data collection, analysis, and communication between
▪ Operational difficulties linked to Identity & Access
operational and compliance costs, as well as inefficiencies in stakeholders.
management: under this scenario all FEs and all CAs’
data collection, analysis, and communication between
▪ High coordination needs and higher complexity compared supervisors will have access to specific reports, on a scale of
stakeholders. High coordination needs and higher complexity
to the Centralised scenario: Coordination and governance several thousand users
Coordination and governance efforts at different levels (MS, EU,
efforts at different levels (MS, EU, FEs).
FEs). ▪ Cost and effort related to the creation of a new governance
▪ Language of reporting of incidents: difficulties linked with model: the governance should be defined, being the number of
▪ Language of reporting of incidents: estimated difficulties
incidents received in local languages and disseminated to other modifications significant, and it uses a centralised approach for
related with Incidents received in local languages and
stakeholders in other Member States without translation. a reporting system that is not governed centrally
disseminated to other stakeholders in other Member States
without translation. ▪ Highly disruptive as it would be the first time a
centralisation of this type of incidents would be done at such
scale and with a mandatory character. This is a challenge at EU
level and a cultural change would be required to make it work.
▪ DORA incident reporting should not be looked at in
isolation: other systems will remain at national level towards
enabling supervisory response and follow-up of incidents at
national level. In addition, the centralised EU Single Hub would
need to interoperate with other reporting systems and reporting
regimes, posing thus further complexities and restrictions the
fully centralised model
▪ Language of reporting of incidents: difficulties linked with the
aggregate reporting of incidents and their analysis in the context
of a centralised solution.
TABLE 6 CBA: COSTS / CHALLENGES
62
8.5 Considerations about future implementation
8.5.1 ESAs solution based on ENISA’s incident reporting tool (Baseline Scenario) as
starting point
175. The Baseline Scenario is scheduled for implementation and production in early 2025.
This means that, regardless of the future scenario to be implemented, subsequent
implementation/centralisation steps should consider the Baseline Solution as the starting
point.
176. In this context, it is important to ensure business continuity of the incident reporting
process in any transition to further centralised solutions, so that the flow of information to
the CAs at both Member State and EU level responsible for supervision and incident
response occurs in a timely and uninterrupted manner. For the fully centralised scenario,
the transition should also guarantee that the relevant staff of CAs (e.g. supervisors, and
other relevant staff) also get access to the information for monitoring, supervisory
response and follow-up purposes, as well as interoperability aspects with the existing
systems CAs may operate to perform supervisory analyses and risk assessment.
8.5.2 Legal considerations
177. The implementation of a different scenario beyond the Baseline Scenario may require
amendments of DORA (please refer to the assessment of the legal implications in Annex
I: Assessment summary). In this respect it is noted that the Baseline scenario may not
require amendments to DORA, provided that the relevant authorities agree to use the
ESAs system. The Data-sharing scenario will require some minor modifications in the
legal framework, mostly linked to the amendments in the notification regime.
178. The centralised solution would require amendments to the structure of incident reporting
under DORA and result in amendments to certain paragraphs in Article 19 of DORA and
to the ITS on forms, templates and procedures (see Annex I for further information), and
to regulate anew aggregate reporting in order to fully exploit the benefits of this scenario.
Provided that amendments to DORA require their adoption by the Legislators, the time
needed to finalise the related EU legislative process should be added to the time to
implement any further centralised solution.
8.5.3 Costs
179. Moving from the baseline solution to any other scenario would involve additional costs to
those already incurred for the implementation of the baseline scenario. This would have
to be allocated and discussed with all relevant competent authorities.
180. The cost related to the implementation of the centralised scenario could have been lower
if the initial expense of developing the baseline first and then moving to the centralised
model could be avoided, e.g. CAs minimising their expenditure on existing or planned
incident reporting solutions at EU level.
63
8.5.4 Data and user migration considerations
181. In both data sharing and centralised scenarios, there is an increase in the number of
users of the system. In the data sharing solution only CAs' personnel need to be migrated
to the new solution, the number will be higher than in the Baseline Scenario, but still in
the same range (all EU supervisors will need swift access to these reports). In the
centralised scenario, the number of users is significantly higher, as not only all CAs’
supervisors but also all FEs (presumably multiple persons per FE) should be given
access to the new solution.
182. By using a solution other than the Baseline Solution as a long-term solution, it will be
necessary to migrate data to the new system in the future. Choosing a different solution
requires careful consideration of the benefits of the new solution against the additional
costs, effort and risks associated with migrating and transitioning from the Baseline
Solution to the new solution. The longer it takes to decide to use a different solution, the
more data will need to be migrated, in any case it should not be critical since the estimated
number of incidents and users is reduced.
64
9 Conclusions
183. Following the assessment conducted, the report concludes the following key points.
184. Based on the identification of potential solutions and the assessment performed, all three
scenarios are considered technically feasible. In addition, most of the potential risks
associated with the different scenarios can be mitigated through additional measures,
which will require additional investments.
185. The market scan performed in the context of this study and the assessment performed of
the two alternative solutions suggests that there may be commercial off-the-shelf
solutions with a high degree of functional and non-functional fit that offer a sound
alternative to a self-developed solution.
186. In the short term (within 3 years from January 2025), only the Baseline Scenario, and
possible enhancements of this scenario is feasible.
187. The implementation of the two scenarios offering further centralisation is considered
feasible in medium (3 years onwards for data-sharing) and longer term (5 years onwards
for fully centralised model), depending on the degree of the centralisation, the
implementation of the required20 policy and legislative change, and the extent to which
they can be implemented as an extension to the solution currently being implemented to
enable reporting in January 2025.
188. While the existing DORA provisions would allow to commence work towards increased
centralisation, amendments and agreements regarding changes in DORA legal
framework, as described in previous sections, would be warranted to exploit fully the
benefits of the centralised model and ensure legal certainty on its governance,
development and operation. At the same time, such agreements among CAs are very
important, considering the topic of aggregated reporting aspects, that can be
controversial. This means that the time required to perform these amendments and any
subsequent policy work towards implementing a single EU Hub needs to be factored in.
189. Regarding costs, there are not significant differences between the three assessed
scenarios and from an overall cost perspective all three solutions are in a similar range.
A fully centralised scenario would normally have been able to ensure savings in absolute
terms, considering that the implementation of one platform would be less costly than the
implementation of many. At the same time, taking into account the costs linked to the
implementation of the baseline solution, which was inevitable given the legal requirement
to have a decentralised DORA ICT-related reporting in January 2025, potential saving
opportunities would materialise only in the longer term. The case of the data sharing
solution is similar, however with lower expected implementation costs, since it is
envisaged to be implemented as an extension of the baseline scenario, and thus bearing
potential OPEX savings for local implementations (as explained in Section 8.3.2).
190. Considering the above, which is further detailed in the analysis, as presented in Chapter
8, each scenario presents both benefits and challenges. Notwithstanding certain
advantages of the baseline and data-sharing models over the fully centralized scenario,
20 Please refer to par 8.2, 8.5.2 and Annex I: Assessment summary - Gartner Consulting
65
the latter shows many merits towards harmonisation, synergies, reducing industry
burden, and with the objectives linked to a Savings and Investments Union and is also
aligned with the objectives of harmonisation identified in DORA. At the same time, it is
considered that a fully centralised scenario would bring full benefits, including for the
market participants, in a wider context of aligning several sectorial and cross-sector
incident reporting regimes.
191. Specifically, the report identified the following advantageous features that can be
achieved to their full extent only with the implementation of a centralized single EU Hub
model:
− avoidance of several parallel reporting channels as identified in paragraph 137 for the
baseline scenario;
− benefits related to shorter dissemination time of the incident reports and potentially
facilitating shorter response time, in case of cross-border incidents;
− the development of advanced and centralised analytical capabilities available to all
users, including both CAs and FEs (also in line with the EIOPA Strategy on Cyber
Underwriting approved by the EIOPA Board of Supervisors in 202021);
− the potential reduction in onwards dissemination times to all stakeholders, which would
be an important prerequisite towards the operation of a cybersecurity crisis
management framework and early warning.
192. It is important to highlight that in any decision about future centralisation, the fundamental
objective of incident reporting — linked to the reporting, analysis, dissemination and
response to such incidents — should be prioritised and be a guiding principle in the
design of the solution (in line with the prerequisites described in 8.2).
193. In addition, a lot of information has been still unknown or uncertain at the time the
assessment was performed, given the implementation status of the baseline DORA
incident reporting solution. This means that further analysis is required to better inform
the decision and the design of a fully centralised solution. Such an analysis would include
at least taking stock of the operation of the baseline solution post-January 2025, any
further enhancements implemented on the baseline solution, and clarifying the elements
that are unknown at this stage. Further, the need for CAs to still operate systems and
solutions at national level, even if a solution were to centralise fully incident data
collection, validation and analytical capabilities, would need to be considered.
194. Finally, the report concludes that further centralization and a single EU Hub scenario for
DORA major ICT incident reporting is feasible and brings certain benefits. At the same
time, the benefits of such centralisation are significantly attenuated in view of two key
factors: the important effort and resources ESAs and CAs would have invested already
for enabling DORA ICT-related incident reporting in January 2025, in line with the DORA
requirements, and the resources that CAs would anyway need to continue to invest in
infrastructures enabling supervisory response and follow-up at national level, even if the
centralized solution were to be implemented. As mentioned above, it is thus important
that co-legislators continue to assess and consider further centralisation into a single EU
hub, having regard to the different elements and aspects highlighted in this report,
21 Please refer to CBA in section 8.4
66
especially also considering minimising costs for transition to a fully centralised EU hub
solution. In addition, such centralisation would be more beneficial and would be worth
considering within a wider context of EU ICT-related incident reporting, beyond DORA.
67
Annex
Annex I: Assessment summary - Gartner Consulting
The following tables summarise the results of the assessment and comparison for the different
scenarios performed by Gartner Consulting. The assessment provided by the Garter
Consulting delivers an assessment grounded in expert judgement and access to relevant
project information. While not intended as an exhaustive review, it nonetheless offers valuable
insights based on a professional appraisal of key data. It is worth noting that some activities,
such as in-depth interviews with primary stakeholders, were outside the assessment's scope.
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
Partially duplicate
decentralised software
and hardware
infrastructure on
national level for all
CAs not accessing the
Hub directly and the
CAs under DORA
Duplicate decentralised
software and hardware On EU level there is Centralised software and
infrastructure on national as no need to have hardware infrastructure
well as EU level duplicated solutions
Infrastructure & FEs should be connected to FEs should be FEs and CAs should be
Technology the CA systems and the CA connected to the CA connected to Baseline
Requirements systems to Baseline systems and the CA Solution
Solution systems to ESA
solution based on Lowest hardware and
Biggest hardware and Baseline Solution, a software need through
software need through new commercial centralisation
Prerequisite decentralisation standard solution, or a
for single EU new self-developed
Hub solution.
Biggest hardware and
software need through
decentralisation (very
similar to baseline
scenario)
As for the baseline
The current wording of The centralised EU hub
scenario, it can be
Article 19 of DORA is would substantially
considered that
compatible with this change the reporting flow
Legal Prerequisites competent authorities
scenario. However, since compared to other
(the legal assessment may agree to use the
Article 19 does not mandate options, since financial
does not examine Hub to dispatch major
the use of a common entities would have to
potential legal incident reports
system by NCAs and the report directly to the hub.
changes for any of across the relevant
other authorities mentioned In this case, a change to
the scenarios at the authorities.
in it, the agreement of these DORA provisions is
Member State level)
authorities to use the needed to require
Please note that
common IT tool is financial entities to submit
however, since
necessary. reports to the central hub.
financial entities would
still provide reports to
68
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
Considering that competent the CAs, a duplication The amendments should
authorities expressed their of reporting may take cover Article 19(4), (6),
interest to using the IT tool, place with respect to (7), and (8) of .DORA.
we do not think that the NIS 2 authorities,
amendments in Article 19 of to which financial Also, amendments of the
DORA to render the tool entities may be procedures to report
compulsory would be obliged to send the incidents, covered in the
necessary. major incident reports ITS referred to in Article
if the national law so 20(b), would need to be
Should there be the requires (Article 19(1), enacted.
intention to require the use sixth subparagraph).
of the IT tool, ad-hoc In particular, it is
changes to Article 19 of Should there be the probable, following exam
DORA would be needed intention to require the of the Commission
use of the IT tool ad- Implementing Act adopted
hoc changes to Article in accordance with Article
19 of DORA would be 20, that certain provisions
needed. on aggregated reporting
would need to be added,
to regulate reporting at
the cross-sector and
cross-Member State level.
In this case, given the
high number of reporting
financial entities, the
option of voluntary
participation to the
Centralised EU Hub is
considered as not
relevant.
TABLE 6: ASSESSMENT SUMMARY PREREQUISITES
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
Reuse of existing, if Reuse of existing CA Centralised and
any, CA incident incident reporting tools standardised
reporting tools infrastructure
Very limited cost
No additional cost savings for CAs Greatest overall cost
savings for CAs savings through
Potential reuse of centralisation
Partially reuse of Baseline Solution, an Potential reuse of
Baseline Solution, an established system Baseline Solution, an
Potential Reduced costs, economies
established system developed by ENISA established system
Benefits of scale and scope
developed by ENISA for incident reporting developed by ENISA
for incident reporting for incident reporting
Reporting flows will
Reporting flows will remain as described in Unified access to
remain as described in DORA with minor incident reporting
DORA with minor modification (potential information in a
modification changes on member transparent and
state levels) consistent way
Planned to be
implemented by Cross CA information No double/multiple
69
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
January 2025 exchange on member reporting needs for
state level could be groups of FEs
Opportunity to use the unified and simplified
same templates for Standardised incident
any reporting flow Cross CA information reporting
based on RTS and on EU level is unified
ITS and simplified Greatest overall
economies of scale
Lowest economies of Unified access to and scope after
scale and scope incident reporting implementation
through duplications information in a
transparent and
consistent way
Limited number of
additional credentials
(only for CAs) on EU
level compared to the
baseline.
Some potential
economies of scale
and scope for CAs
Low: 'Standardisation Medium:
only on EU level 'Standardisation on
High: 'Standardisation
between ESAs CA and EU level
on FE /CA and EU
level
Less overall Less overall
standardised data standardised data
Standardised data
Supervisory Convergence collection from data collection from data
collection from data
(shared data basis, …) sources (FEs/member sources (FEs/member
sources FEs directly
states) states)
Centralised consistent
Decentralised Decentralised
consolidated timely
potential inconsistent potential inconsistent
data basis
and asynchronous and asynchronous
data basis data basis
Duplicate incident Duplicate incident
reporting databases reporting databases
managed by the CAs managed by the CAs
Only one centralised
and a consolidated and a consolidated
incident reporting
database on EU level database on EU level
database is needed
Market Overview are required are required.
(consolidated database)
Centralised consistent
Decentralised Decentralised
consolidated timely
potential inconsistent potential inconsistent
data basis
and asynchronous and asynchronous
data basis should be data basis should be
consolidated consolidated
FEs are onboarded
Currently not planned Currently not planned
and have access no
Opportunity to give FEs
additional efforts
access to incident reporting Potential additional Potential additional
needed
data costs related to the costs related to the
necessary necessary
Potential additional
anonymisation of data anonymisation of data
costs related to the
70
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
and implementation of and implementation of necessary
additional roles additional roles anonymisation of data
and implementation of
Significant additional Significant additional additional roles
effort would be effort would be
required to provide required to provide
FEs access FEs access
TABLE 7 ASSESSMENT SUMMARY: BENEFITS
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario (ESA Data Sharing Centralised EU
Hub) Scenario Hub (Single EU
Hub)
Reporting flows
need to be
Potential delays
adapted to the
due to two-step
new centralised
data collection
reporting
process
approach
Potential delays due to two-
Double/multiple
step data collection process CAs are no longer
reporting of the
the first point of
same incidents
Double/multiple reporting of contact of the FEs
through groups of
the same incidents through for incident
FEs limits their
groups of FEs limits their reporting
Identified potential to
Limitations potential to optimise their
Limitations optimise their
reporting processes Country specific
reporting
incident reporting
processes
Complex standardisation due features or
to heterogenous information may
Complex
infrastructure and get lost
standardisation
decentralised processes
due to
Through
heterogenous
centralisation easy
infrastructure and
standardisation of
mainly
processes, data
decentralised
and (analytical)
processes
functionalities
Potential
inconsistencies
Need to manage a
Potential inconsistencies due due to duplicate
considerable
to duplicate data and systems data and systems
amount of FEs
D information security
providing
standards on CA level Different
information
information
directly to the
Operational/Technical The data received by the security standards
central hub
Risk ESAs is not received directly on CA level
from the data source
Management of a
The data received
significant number
Inconsistent data due to by the ESAs is not
of login
multiple reporting of the same received directly
credentials
incident in different formats from the data
centrally
source
Inconsistent data
71
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario (ESA Data Sharing Centralised EU
Hub) Scenario Hub (Single EU
Hub)
due to multiple
reporting of the
same incident in
different formats
Centralised
There are database which
duplicate creates a potential
Duplicate databases on
databases on single source of
Security Risk (data national and EU level with
national and EU failure, which
concentration) different information security
level with different need to be
standards
information mitigated with
security standards appropriate
measures
High - the
complete data
Low - quality
collection process
Low - quality assured data is assured data is
Reputational Risk including the
provided by the CAs provided by the
quality assurance
CAs
is managed on EU
level
Delayed
Delayed consolidated data consolidated data
Others availability due to 2-stage availability due to
data collection 2-stage data
collection
TABLE 8 ASSESSMENT SUMMARY: LIMITATIONS AND RISKS
Categories Criteria Baseline Data Sharing Centralised EU
Scenario (ESA Scenario Hub (Single EU
Hub) Hub)
Not standardised Not standardised
Standardised
for FEs and CAs for the FEs and CAs
not accessing the
FEs need to
FEs need to data hub
connect to the
connect to CAs
Technical Central EU HUB
FEs need to connect
Interoperability Compatibility/Connectivity with
CAs need to to CAs
Existing Systems CAs need to
connect to
connect to the
Baseline Solution CAs need to connect
(central EU to central EU
Central EU HUB
solution) solution (e.g.
Simplest (number
Baseline Solution)
and types)
CAs need to
72
Categories Criteria Baseline Data Sharing Centralised EU
Scenario (ESA Scenario Hub (Single EU
Hub) Hub)
connect to other CA s need to connectivity
CAs. connect to other CAs requirements
Compared to
Most complex Baseline Scenario
(number and simplified (number)
types) connectivity connectivity
requirements requirements for CAs
Handled by the
CAs in Handled by the CAs
Handled on EU
collaboration with in collaboration with
level by the ESAs
the ESAs the ESAs
or other EU
stakeholders
Complex data Complex data
Data Harmonisation
harmonisation due harmonisation due to
Simple data
to decentral two- decentral two- stage
harmonisation due
stage data data collection, non-
to centralised data
collection, non- standardised first
collection
standardised first stage
stage
Complex
governance Complex governance
structure structure Simple governance
structure
Governance Structure Governed in a Governed
decentralised decentralised on Governed centrally
manner on national national as well as on EU level
as well as on EU on EU level
level
Complex duplicated
Complex Simple centralised
data management
duplicated data data management
procedures
Operational management procedures
Data Management Procedures
Management procedures
CAs and ESAs
ESAs and/or other
and/or other EU
CAs and ESAs EU stakeholders
stakeholders
Two-stage Two-stage
heterogenous data heterogeneous data One-stage data
quality quality management quality
management process established management
Quality Assurance Measures process at national level by established at EU
established at CAs and at EU level level by the ESAs
national level by by the ESAs and/or and/or other EU
CAs and at EU other EU stakeholders.
level by the ESAs stakeholders.
All CAs, ESAs and
CAs and ESAs are All CAs and ESAs
FEs will have
planned to get are planned to get
Eligibility Criteria access to the
access to the EU access to the EU
Membership (type of stakeholder that can get centralised EU
database what is database what is
Conditions access to the centralised EU hub, the feasibility
technical feasible technical feasible
solution) is assumed to be
(slightly higher
given but needs to
Additional efforts number of CAs using
be explored in
are needed to the solution
more detail and the
73
Categories Criteria Baseline Data Sharing Centralised EU
Scenario (ESA Scenario Hub (Single EU
Hub) Hub)
provide FEs compared to implications
access baseline scenario) assessed
Additional efforts are
needed to provide
FEs access
Membership
Membership
application need to
Membership application need to
be processed by
application need to be processed by
ESAs and/or other
be processed by CAs, ESAs and/or
EU stakeholders
CAs or ESAs other EU
stakeholders
Membership Application The membership
Potentially more
decision should be
complex Potentially more
aligned with
heterogeneous complex
national
membership heterogeneous
requirements,
application process membership
which may become
application process
quite complex
At ESA and/or
other EU
stakeholder level
At CA or ESA At CA or ESA/other
Confidentiality Measures
level. EU stakeholder level. Quite complex and
effort intensive
clearance process
for the FEs
At the CA or ESA At CA or ESA/other
level EU stakeholder level At EU level
Through Through Through
Potential Membership Costs
decentralisation decentralisation and centralisation
and duplication duplication potentially lowest
potentially higher potentially higher cost
cost cost
TABLE 9 ASSESSMENT SUMMARY: INTEROPERABILITY, OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT, MEMBERSHIP CONDITIONS
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
To local CAs and
To EU Hub
Baseline Solution To EU Hub
IAM Access by CAs Simplified due to the
Complex due to the Simple due to
possibility to use the
need to directly centralised hub
data sharing solution
interact with other CAs
74
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
Managed by CAs
Managed by CAs
Managed by ESAs or
Complex due to the other European
Complex due to the
need to provide stakeholders
Access by FEs need to provide
reports to multiple
reports to multiple
CAs and partially in Simple due to
CAs in different
addition even NIS centralised reporting
countries
authorities
Assigned by ESAs or
Assigned by CAs and
Assigned by CAs and other European
ESAs
ESAs/other European stakeholders
stakeholders
Assignment of roles for the Complex due to
Simpler and more
different functionalities of decentralised data
Complex due to consistent due to
the tool reporting to multiple
decentralised data centralised data
CAs and partially in
reporting to multiple reporting
addition even NIS
CAs
authorities
Defined and managed
Defined and managed
by ESAs/other
Defined and managed by CAs and
European
by CAs and ESAs ESAs/other European
stakeholders
stakeholders
Complex due to
Role Definition & Provision of enhanced
decentralised Complex due to
Management functionalities will add
reporting and the need decentralised
additional complexity
of the FEs to provide reporting and the need
reports to multiple of the FEs to provide
More consistent due
CAs reports to multiple
to centralised
CAs
reporting
Managed by CAs &
ESAs/other EU
Managed by CAs &
stakeholders
ESAs
Managed by
Complex due to
Complex due to ESAs/other EU
decentralised
decentralised stakeholders
reporting and the need
Credential Management reporting and the need
of the FEs to provide
of the FEs to provide Simple and consistent
reports to multiple
reports to multiple due to centralised EU
CAs
CAs partially in Hub
addition even NIS
For CAs using the
authorities
data sharing solution
simplified
At CA and ESA/other At ESA/other
Platform Costs (set-up
At CA and ESA level European stakeholder European stakeholder
costs / maintenance)
level level
Financial
Costs Business expertise is
Business expertise is Business expertise is
Expertise capacity building required on EU level,
required at country required at country
cost (Business) only to a limited extent
and EU level and EU level
on national level
75
Categories Criteria Baseline Scenario Data Sharing Centralised EU Hub
(ESA Hub) Scenario (Single EU Hub)
Technical solutions Technical solutions
Technical solutions
Expertise capacity building expertise is required expertise is required
expertise is required
cost (IT) at country and EU at country and EU
at EU level
level level
Cost-Benefit Analysis See following sub See following sub See following sub
Summary chapter chapter chapter
TABLE 10 ASSESSMENT SUMMARY: IAM AND FINANCIAL COSTS
Annex II: Gartner Consulting CBA and Conclusions
CBA: PROs and CONs from an overall economic perspective – Gartner Consulting’s
point of view
BASELINE DATA-SHARING CENTRALISED
PROS PROS PROS
▪ Lean cost-efficient solution on EU ▪ Established data collection process ▪ Most cost efficient overall solution
level and systems may be re-used (lowest hardware and software
need through centralisation)
▪ Established data collection process ▪ No need to share report information
and systems may be re-used between CAs on national level ▪ No redundant systems, capacity
and data on EU/national level
▪ Some potential economies of scale
and scope for CAs ▪ Greatest economies of scale and
scope
▪ One consistent data base with all
European incident reports
▪ Opportunity to provide
Aadvanced analytical capabilities
to all member states
▪ No redundant incident
reportingTimely information basis
(one-step data collection process
CONS CONS CONS
▪ Redundant systems, capacity and ▪ Redundant systems, capacity and ▪ A solid legal basis should be
data on national level is needed data on national level is needed created first
▪ Lowest economies of scale and scope ▪ Due to redundant incident reporting ▪ Potential Centralisation risks
potentially inconsistent information need to be mitigated
▪ Due to redundant incident reporting
potentially inconsistent information ▪ Delayed information sharing (two-step
data collection process)
▪ Delayed information sharing (two-step
data collection process)
TABLE 11 GARTNER CONSULTING’S OPINION: PROS & CONS
▪ From an overall economic perspective, the scenario providing overall (most benefits / and could be
associated with the lowest overall cost depending on the detail design (which was not part of the
current project) is a Central EU HUB according to Gartner Consulting´s current point of view.
76
▪ No duplicate systems, capacity and data on EU/national level (cost efficient).
▪ A centralised, more sophisticated solution is still cheaper overall in the long run than
multiple (dozens or even hundreds) simple local solutions.
▪ One consistent data base with all European incident reports
▪ No duplicate incident reporting as identified in the Baseline scenario
▪ Timely information basis (one-step data collection process)
▪ Potential opportunity (considering the current heterogenous environments
and IT security standards in the member states) with an appropriate detail
design to increase the IT security of the complete “Cybersecurity Incident
Reporting Ecosystem”
▪ The Data Sharing solution and the Baseline Scenario both scenarios need duplicate infrastructure,
data and other capacities on national and EU level
▪ In both scenarios due to duplicate incident reporting potentially inconsistent information and the risk
of delayed information sharing due to the two-step data collection process)
FIGURE 15 OVERALL PERSPECTIVE: HIGH-LEVEL OVERALL COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS
Conclusions – Gartner Consulting’s point of view
77
Considering that a fully centralised EU Hub and an EU Data Sharing Solution cannot be
implemented on the short term due to legal prerequisites which need to be created first,
we conclude the following:
• In the short term, no scenario other than the Baseline Scenario is possible. In the
medium to long term, all three scenarios are technically feasible, provided the legal
requirements are created. There have been no obvious showstoppers identified
• The results of the assessments as presented in the previous sections show that
overall, there is no dominant scenario, i.e. an absolute best scenario for all
stakeholder groups and stakeholders involved according to all criteria listed in
DORA (Article 21(2)).
• Therefore, the suitability of the three different scenarios depends on the strategic
objectives to be achieved.
If the strategic goal is to change the existing reporting of incidents as little as possible,
maintaining the current division of labour (modus operandi) between the ESAs and CAs,
78
to leverage the existing systems and to allow for country-specific adjustments, then the
Baseline Scenario is the best solution. The downside of this scenario is that it is based on
the most complex data collection and management process considering the necessary
steps and the necessary number of interfaces between the involved different legal entities.
It also provides the lowest supervisory convergence. Groups of FEs working in different
EU countries may need to double/multiple report in this scenario the same incidents to
multiple CAs potentially in different formats.
Is the strategic goal to have the best consistent and standardised high quality incident
reporting data available on EU level in a timely manner and to simplify the incident reporting
for the FEs the Central Hub is the best solutions. The data collection and management
process are the least complex one of all scenarios. Such a central hub could also allow to
provide all member state authorities the same sophisticated analytical tools which would
allow to get valuable insights by leveraging the available information about cyber incidents
in the best way. A central system would also allow to implement easier future changes and
a high secure incident reporting ecosystem. This is easier to achieve with a centralised
system compared to a decentral fragmented data collection approach based on systems
with different technologies and different IT security standards. A potential concentration
risk could be mitigated setting up appropriate IT security measures.
A central EU hub would allow to create most synergies through the centralisation of the
necessary software and hardware infrastructure. Through centralisation of the data
collection and quality assurance processes this scenario could also provide the best
consistent timely consolidated incident reporting database on EU level. The
standardisation of the incident reports and reporting processes could also provide the
highest level of supervisory convergence of all scenarios. Depending on the detailed
design of the Centralised Hub (technical solution as well as associated business and IT
processes), these synergies (economies of scale) may vary in magnitude. (Note: the
detailed solution design was not the subject of the Gartner Consulting project). To quantify
such economies of scale, also the different characteristics of the NCAs (size of available
infrastructure/capabilities) in the different member states should be taken into account.
Gartner Consulting therefore recommends that all NCAs be more closely involved in the
design phase of the detailed solution, which was not possible in the current phase given
the scope of the Gartner Consulting project. Such an approach makes it possible to jointly
design a centralised solution that creates maximum economies of scale for the common
benefit of all NCOs, ESAs, FEs and other stakeholders and increases the overall IT security
level of the entire Cyber Security Incident Reporting ecosystem.”
The Data Sharing Solution is a scenario which is a mix of the two other scenarios and
provides some benefits for the CAs but still leveraging the existing incident reporting
processes and tools to a far extent. This scenario could be seen as an interims step
towards a centralised hub, it is very similar to the baseline scenario but provides CAs the
possibility to access the information centrally and not through point-to-point data exchange
with other CAs which may reduce on CA side significantly efforts but still may require
groups of FEs working in different EU countries to double/multiple report the same
incidents to multiple CAs potentially in different formats. The synergies for the NIS 2 CAs
may also be limited since FEs may be legally obliged if national law requires them to submit
79
major incident reports directly to the relevant authorities. The data collection process is
simpler compared to the Baseline Scenario, as this scenario at national level can, where
legally possible, allow data to no longer be exchanged between CAs at national level. But
the data collection process is still based on two stages which makes the data collection
process much more complex compared to the Central Hub Scenario.
Risks were identified which need but also can be mitigated with appropriate measures, in
particular in the case of a Centralised Hub the risks associated with the centralisation.
Standard solutions with a high degree of functional and non-functional coverage are
available in the market as alternatives to self-developed solutions
Considering the increasing importance of timely high quality incident reporting data, the
need to take aligned effective counter measures in time and the potential damage which
could be created by delays in the context, the associated overall infrastructure cost seems
to be neglectable low.
80
Annex III: Existing Systems
1. In order to effectively understand the possibilities towards a further centralisation of
incident reporting under DORA, it is essential to understand the current responsibilities,
procedures and systems in place at the national, EU, and commercial levels. This
section delves into the existing frameworks and mechanisms that facilitate incident
reporting within the financial sector. By examining the approaches adopted by various
stakeholders, we can gain insights into the current landscape of incident reporting
practices.
2. Furthermore, the main strengths and limitations of these existing systems will be
explored, highlighting areas where improvements can be made. Through this analysis,
the aim is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the current state of ICT incident
reporting, paving the way for the formulation of more centralised frameworks which can
be relevant for DORA.
Case Study 1 – ESMA
3. In the realm of incident reporting, the role of ESMA is notably twofold, encompassing both
direct and shared supervisory responsibilities. ESMA's direct supervisory purview
extends to all EU Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs), Trade Repositories (TRs),
Securitisation Repositories (SRs), certain Data Reporting Services Providers (DRSPs),
specific benchmark administrators, and Tier 2 third-country Central Counterparties
(CCPs).
4. In contrast, the National Competent Authorities (NCAs) maintain supervisory
responsibilities over all other market actors. This means that while ESMA has a significant
role to play, its efforts are complemented by those of the NCAs, leading to a broad-based,
multi-layered approach to incident reporting and management. The synergy between
ESMA and the NCAs thus forms a comprehensive framework that addresses the diverse
spectrum of entities operating within the EU's financial markets. The integration and
cooperation of these bodies aim to enhance the overall robustness and resilience of the
financial market infrastructure in the face of ICT-related threats.
ESMA - IT implementation
5. As a direct supervisor of certain types of financial entities, ESMA holds a significant role
in the incident reporting process. ESMA is responsible for receiving initial notifications
and subsequent reports of major ICT-related incidents from these entities. It is then
required to assess the relevance and impact of the incident on a broader scale, taking
into consideration other competent authorities in the EU. This involves a proactive
analysis of the incident's potential ripple effects on the financial markets of other Member
States, thus ensuring timely and relevant information exchange. As such, ESMA acts as
a crucial link between the incident-affected entity and the collective response of the EU's
financial market authorities.
81
6. For the purpose of this study, the focus will be limited to two types of ESMA’s supervised
entities that report the highest number of ICT incidents: Trade Repositories (TRs) and
Data Reporting Services Providers (DRSPs).
7. The incident management process at ESMA level is composed by the following sub
processes and tools supported by an IT implementation:
(a) Incident Reporting
(b) Incident Assessment (Incident Panel)
(c) Incident follow-up
(d) Pre-Enforcement
(e) Reporting templates
(f) Incident log
(g) Incident dashboard
FIGURE 16: ESMA INCIDENT REPORTING FLOW
Case Study 2 – EBA
8. With regard to the incident reporting function at the European Banking Authority (EBA),
the revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) conferred a mandate to the EBA to collect
and disseminate reports on major security or operational payment-related incidents.
9. Since 2018, the EBA has been tasked to receive major incident reports impacting
payment service providers, including credit institutions, payment institutions and e-money
institutions, (PSPs). The reporting flow requires PSPs to submit an initial, intermediate or
82
final report of a major incident to their CAs, which subsequently send it to the EBA and
the ECB. Upon receipt of the major incident report, the EBA, ECB and the submitting CA
are required to assess the relevance of the incident to other Member States and the EBA
is required to notify and forward these incidents reports to the CAs from these relevant
Member States. In addition, the EBA together with the ECB and in cooperation with the
competent authority of the home Member State is required to assess the relevance of the
incident to other relevant Union and national authorities and to notify them accordingly.
10. The provisions related to the classification and reporting of major incidents under PSD2,
the specification of the classification criteria, materiality thresholds, as well as the
reporting template, the description of the data fields and instructions how to populate the
template are set out in the EBA Guidelines on major incident reporting under PSD2.
11. Based on the major incident reporting under PSD2, the EBA and ECB have been
following high-level reporting trends and assessing the information received, which led to
the revision of said Guidelines, organisation of an industry workshop on the trends and
issues observed related to major payment-related incidents, and, crucially, as an input
informing the policy development of the incident-related policy mandates under DORA.
EBA - EUCLID system
Overview
12. The European Centralised Infrastructure for Supervisory Data (EUCLID) platform is the
current system for banking and financial data in the EU’s financial sector which is place
since its implementation 2021. EUCLID keeps evolving in terms of scope of reporting
entities and functionalities, with a data dissemination platform being launched during Q4
2023 and Q1 2024 (phase 1 and 2, respectively). In addition, it is complemented with the
EBA’s public registers, namely the Credit Institutions Register (CIR) and the Payments
Institutions register (PIR) under the Payments Service Directive (PSD2), and possibly
with a critical Third Party Providers (cTTPs) register in coming years.
13. The current reporting scope to the EBA covers over 10,000 reporting entities including
EU/EEA credit institutions banking groups, investment firms, investment firms’ groups,
resolution groups, payment and e-money institutions1.
Legal basis
14. The EBA EUCLID Decision2, sets out the scope, timing and modalities of the data
submission and covers the reporting for all CAs to the EBA, for the different reporting
modules including supervisory, resolution, investment firms and payments data.
Reporting process and CAs involvement
15. At the EBA, the supervisory data has two main flows, one for the master data needed for
setting up the reporting calendar and one for the supervisory data. Concerning master
data, CAs source them from their own national registers, internal supervisory activities or
directly from reporting entities, later sending the required supervisory master data to the
EBA.
83
16. In addition, reporting entities send the supervisory data to the relevant CA which forwards
the information to the EBA. To ensure that data are submitted in the most efficient way,
avoid duplication of reporting requirements and a smooth process for data transmission
to the EBA, the sequential approach is place for supervisory and master data to ensure
the consistency of data submitted to different authorities. In this respect the ECB and the
SRB forwards, those data on behalf of CAs participating in the SSM, to the EBA.
17. For the transmission of files from CAs to the EBA, it was agreed to use the eXtensible
Business Reporting Language (XBRL) standard for all supervisory files submitted. XBRL
has the advantage of providing a high degree of flexibility in the creation of XBRL instance
documents and provides a maximum level of harmonisation of the supervisory reporting
among other things.
Data collection and analysis
18. Supervisory data are submitted according to the Data Point Model (DPM) specified by
EBA and additional technical specifications provided. The DPM is a structured
representation of the data identifying all the business concepts and its relations, as well
as validation rules. It contains all the relevant technical specifications necessary for
developing an IT reporting solution.
19. Additionally, with the aim of providing a uniform implementation of the reporting
requirements, XBRL taxonomies are produced based on metadata in DPM to present the
data items, business concepts, relations and validation rules in XBRL standard format.
Information sharing and collaboration
20. EBA collaborates with different EU supervisory authorities through memorandum of
understanding (MoUs) on sharing data and continues to facilitate methods of exploiting
the data. Additionally, the EBA also increased the number of data visualisations tools on
a wide range policy areas aimed at presenting large amounts of data in a more
comprehensive and dynamic manner.
21. On the EBA’s website, the public can find user-friendly tools for different topics and risk
areas, which allow users to explore comparable bank-by-bank figures through maps,
tables and graphs to provide transparency on the EU financial system and enhance the
role of the EBA’s EU hub for banking data.
Main benefits
22. One of the main benefits is its scalability, among other aspects, whereas the number of
files transmitted to the EBA since its inception has grown constantly proportionally to the
number of reporting agents and modules, reaching over 244 000 files for 2022 reference
dates.
23. From an analytical point of view, EUCLID allows the EBA to carry out deeper analyses of
the EU-wide financial sector with the aim of enhancing its role as data-driven organisation
in line with its data strategy.
84
Case Study 3 – ENISA Baseline Solution
Overview and legal framework
24. ENISA maintains an incident reporting tool, called CIRAS (Cybersecurity Incident
Reporting and Analysis System), for the authorities, where they can upload reports, and
search for and study specific incidents. At the moment, the main use for CIRAS is to
support the annual summary rep