31 July 2026
JC 2026 25
ESA Statement
Toward a consistent and risk-based approach
for ICT risks from frontier AI models
1. The advanced capabilities of recent frontier AI models significantly accelerate cyber risks, underscoring
the urgent need for robust cybersecurity measures and rapid incident response capabilities. AI-
enabled cyber tools could generate systemic risks due to their ability to: i) rapidly discover and exploit
vulnerabilities; ii) target vulnerabilities in shared infrastructure; and iii) leverage single points of failure
across entities1. While these models can help deliver substantial defensive improvements, they can
also provide an advantage to malicious actors, which could leverage these capabilities, while defenders
need to implement their responses following quality assured protocols.
2. On 7 July, the European Commission published its Action Plan on Cybersecurity and Artificial
Intelligence to reinforce the EU’s cybersecurity and resilience2. In this context, the ESRB stressed in its
issues note and in its warning3 that the misuse of highly capable AI models could have a substantial
impact in the financial system. If such disruptions persist for several days or affect multiple institutions
simultaneously, the consequences could extend beyond individual entities to the broader financial
system and the real economy. Likewise, ENISA published an initial set of recommendations to develop
the operational capabilities of the various stakeholders to face these risks4.
3. Therefore, the supervisory dialogue with the financial entities pays particular attention to these risks
and to the measures financial entities have in place to safeguard operational resilience. In particular,
the ECB has emphasised to the CEOs of the significant institutions5 the importance of addressing,
without delay, open supervisory findings and measures related to the ICT areas in focus and security
risks that have been identified in previous supervisory activities such as on-site inspections, targeted
reviews and the 2024 cyber-resilience stress test. Given the accelerating threat landscape, existing
weaknesses that remain unresolved may become increasingly material and pose significant risks to
operational resilience. Likewise, other competent authorities may set their supervisory expectations
accordingly.
1 See also IMF Blogpost (07th May 2026) Financial Stability Risks Mount as Artificial Intelligence Fuels Cyberattacks
2 EU Action Plan on Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence | Shaping Europe’s digital future
3 Warning of the European Systemic Risk Board of 25 June 2026 on systemic cyber risks stemming from frontier artificial
intelligence models (ESRB/2026/3)
4 https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/enisas-view-on-cybersecurity-in-the-frontier-ai-era
5 Addressing AI-enabled cybersecurity threats
1
4. The ESAs have a mandate to promote coordination between competent authorities and to foster
supervisory convergence. Given the significant ICT risks stemming from frontier AI models, the goal of
this ESA statement is to provide context to the current situation considering the existing legislation and
supervisory expectations, through possible mitigating actions that financial entities may implement to
address these risks. In this regard, the present ESA Statement is consistent with the initiatives and
communications issued by the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), the ENISA and the competent
authorities, and with the objectives of the European Commission Action Plan.
5. The current EU regulatory framework, especially the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) and the
AI Act, provide a solid foundation to tackle risks stemming from the release of highly capable AI models.
The requirements set out in DORA remain highly relevant, through the implementation of the ICT risk
management framework, testing, incident and recovery management and ICT third party risk
management. The AI Act provides a framework for ‘General-purpose AI models with systemic risk’,
where providers are subject to additional obligations, including transparency, the provision of relevant
technical documentation and cybersecurity aspects. While the regulatory framework remains
technology-neutral, the shorter vulnerability discovery and exploitation cycles, led the ESAs to
encourage financial entities to act fast and proactively, make the necessary arrangements to enhance
their cybersecurity capabilities and adapt them to the new context. It is expected that financial entities
implement measures in a proportionate manner, considering their size and overall risk profile, and the
nature, scale and complexity of their services, activities and operations.
6. Consequently, to strengthen the risk mitigation, to promote a coordinated supervisory approach and
ensure a level playing field across the EU, the ESAs encourage financial entities, taking into account the
expectations of their supervisory authorities, to adjust ICT risk management processes, procedures and
controls according to the following three risk mitigation strategies: i) prevention; ii) detection; iii)
management. The Annex provides examples of risk mitigation strategies and potential actions that can
be summarised as:
. Prevention relies on comprehensive and continuously updated inventories of all IT assets
(including infrastructure, applications, data repositories, APIs, and AI/ML components), as
this enables financial entities to classify assets based on criticality and exposure. Secure-by-
design principles ensure that systems are architected with built-in safeguards, rather than
relying solely on reactive controls. Strong monitoring and proactive patching processes are
essential to maintaining resilience against evolving threats and reduce the window of
exposure. Assessing the risk from dependencies among IT assets is essential for consistently
prioritising preventive measures.
. Detection scales up existing vulnerability discovery processes, in terms of timeliness and
complexity, to match the existing threats. Despite preventive measures, the perimeter might
still be breached by AI-assisted threat actors. Therefore, detective measures are essential to
identify, analyse, and respond to intrusions before they escalate into significant incidents.
Monitoring processes transition from periodic to continuous, to reduce detection and
response times, and enhance visibility into unusual or malicious behaviour. Security operation
2
centre (SOC) and red teaming capabilities can be enhanced with AI solutions in addition to
existing technical and staff capabilities.
. Management of cyber risk to improve operational resilience, through operational resilience
testing, enhanced disaster recovery, data backup capabilities and increased cyber maturity.
Risk management frameworks, testing methodologies, and governance structures need to
adapt to address AI-assisted threats and potential multi-system failures. In parallel,
management bodies must ensure that accountability keeps pace with emerging risks, while
cybersecurity awareness must evolve toward a more proactive and adaptive mindset. The
amendment of existing IT risk management frameworks would potentially trigger needed
updates on the business and IT architecture, alongside changes to business continuity plans.
7. In this context, competent authorities should also ensure that financial entities’ management body is
fully committed to mitigate frontier AI models-driven cyber risks, with clear governance and
accountability frameworks in place, timely response plans adequately prepared, and sufficient internal
investments dedicated to strengthening cyber resilience. The Risk Appetite Framework should be
reviewed to update and/or incorporate metrics, tolerance thresholds, and control measures consistent
with the evolving risk profile stemming both from the internal use of such models and from indirect
exposure to them.
8. In all cases and without delay, the financial entities should establish governance structures that support
effective management of frontier AI related risk and closely monitor this risk. While ideally financial
entities try and match the speed and sophistication of AI-assisted threat actors, a one-size-fits-all
approach when implementing these risk mitigation strategies would not be proportionate and
efficient. Instead, entities shall take into account their size and overall risk profile, and the nature,
interconnectedness, scale and complexity of their services, activities and operations when designing
their risk mitigation strategies (DORA Art.4).
9. The ESAs will keep working with competent authorities to maintain a proportionate, risk-based and
forward-looking approach regarding emerging risks from advanced AI models with cyber capabilities.
Such combined efforts will aim at ensuring that the financial sector is sufficiently resilient, consistently
with the objectives of the DORA framework.
10. Furthermore, the ESAs as Lead Overseers initiated targeted engagement with relevant CTPPs to
understand how they identify and manage the new challenges they face. It covered the identification
and assessment of the risks, the mitigation measures they have implemented, and their adaptation to
the opportunities associated with these new capabilities. The insights gained have informed the annual
risk assessment cycle and the prioritisation of activities under the 2027 Oversight Plan. The ESAs as
Lead Overseers have also begun embedding AI-related risks into its Oversight Examination
Methodology and will continue to strengthen this work throughout 2027. In parallel, these threats are
expected to be reflected in the scope of the oversight examinations and other oversight activities in
2027 to assess the preparedness and resilience of CTPPs in an increasingly AI-enabled threat
environment.
3
Annex – Examples of risk mitigation strategies and actions
Financial entities may consider these risk mitigation strategies and actions taking into account their size, complexity, interconnectedness and risk
exposure. This Annex does not establish additional requirements, nor should be regarded as a comprehensive checklist. Instead, it is to be read as
illustrative examples to be considered by financial entities, also in their dialogue with ICT third-party service providers.
Strategy Risk Potential actions to consider
Prevention
As referred to in Article 10 of the RTS RMF, measures may
Implement automated security Traditional static security models may not be able to respond
range from basic automated vulnerability scanning and
controls into development, timely to AI-enhanced attacks as they rely on predefined rules,
patch management to (AI-augmented) “DevSecOps”
deployment, and operational signatures, and fixed patterns, while AI-driven threats are
(Development, Security, and Operations) practices, across
workflows dynamic and adaptive.
the ICT-System lifecycle.
AI’s ability to analyse and exploit architectural flaws (such as Implement basic secure design principles, threat
Implement security and resilience by poorly secured APIs, excessive permissions, or monolithic modelling, for critical systems and network segmentation,
design principles system designs) further emphasizes the need to embed evolving towards more advanced techniques like zero-
security and resilience into systems from the outset. trust architectures and AI-driven threat modelling.
Protect proprietary source code and critical configuration
Highly capable AI-models can analyse leaked or exposed source confidentiality to reduce the attack surface available for
code to identify vulnerabilities, backdoors, or proprietary automated discovery, slow down reconnaissance,
Protect confidentiality of source code
algorithms, or even attempt to reverse engineer protected improve the effectiveness of deception operations and
code in search of known vulnerabilities. limit the ability to exploit application weaknesses quickly
and systematically.
4
A larger attack surface provides more entry points for Eliminate unnecessary exposures, enforcing
cyberattacks, which highly capable AI models may rapidly scan segmentation, and decommissioning legacy systems. This
and analyse to identify weak spots, misconfigurations, or can be achieved by applying, as a minimum, basic hygiene
Reduce the attack surface
unpatched vulnerabilities at scale. The broader and more measures (e.g., inventory management), and evolving
complex the attack surface, the easier it is for AI-powered into more advanced techniques like AI-driven attack
adversaries to find and prioritize exploitable targets quickly. surface management.
Following a risk-based approach investigate proactive and
automated patch processes for high-risk systems and
patches, and aim towards extending these processes to
AI-driven attacks operate at machine speed, enabling all environments, including disaster recovery (DR) and
Proactive and automated patches for vulnerability detection and exploitation in a very short time backup systems.
high/risk systems across all span. Traditional patching processes relying on periodic and Consider newly introduced or enhanced risks and ensure
environments reactive approach may not be sufficient to ensure a timely sufficient mitigating controls, such as clear criteria for
reaction. which patches and systems to include, sufficient
(automated) testing, monitoring, the deployment
schedule, redundancies, or robust fallback plans and
rollback procedures.
The risk toolkit includes strict access controls, continuous
monitoring, and multi-factor authentication (MFA) to limit
AI-driven attacks can bypass controls based on traditional
Ensure that access management the impact of breaches; as the maturity of the control
methods, such as static passwords or perimeter-based security,
minimises permissions and reduces environment grows, foundational requirements like basic
mimic legitimate behaviour, and exploit trust relationships
the likeliness of unauthorised access MFA and least-privilege access may evolve into advanced
faster than legacy defences can respond.
techniques like behavioural analytics and just-in-time (JIT)
access.
Assess, monitor, and enforce
Assess, monitor, and enforce cybersecurity standards
cybersecurity standards across the In a supply chain attack, an attacker may compromise an entity
across the whole supply chain, with more rigorous
whole supply chain through an ICT third-party service provider; this can be further
controls for greater exposure and more complex supply
5
exploited by sophisticated AI models, which can identify weak chains. This includes not only services providers and
links in the supply chain and automate multi-stage attacks. partners but also soft- and hardware providers and open-
source communities.
Detection
Employ continuous scanning and monitoring to detect and
Periodic vulnerability scanning may no longer be sufficient in remediate weaknesses before they are exploited. Align the
Apply continuous vulnerability
the face of AI-driven attacks, which can uncover zero-day frequency and depth of scanning with the financial entity’s
scanning and monitoring
vulnerabilities and exploit them immediately. risk profile: from basic automated scans to AI-driven, real-
time vulnerability management.
Implement comprehensive logging and behavioural
Implement comprehensive logging
AI-assisted attackers can generate unusual activity patterns monitoring strategies to detect anomalies, use deception
and behavioural monitoring while
that traditional signature-based detection may miss. techniques, identify lateral movements, and respond to
avoiding data overload
intrusions before they cause significant damage.
AI-driven attacks can operate continuously, adapt in real time,
and exploit vulnerabilities shortly after emergence; they can Increase the frequency of scans, tests, and compliance
Increase the frequency of scans, tests, learn from failed attempts and quickly adjust tactics to bypass checks, to keep pace with dynamic threats, moving
and compliance checks controls, making gaps between scheduled checks highly towards continuous or near-real-time monitoring when
exploitable. This may make periodic security checks (e.g., possible.
annual penetration tests or compliance audits) insufficient.
Risk management and operational resilience
Update incident reporting and
Update and regularly test incident reporting and Business
Incident response and business continuity plans are often
Business Continuity Processes
Continuity Processes frameworks for AI-assisted threats
designed for single-system failures or linear attack progression
frameworks to account for AI-assisted
and multi-system failure, ensuring coordinated response
threats and multi-system failure
and may not be adequate under AI-assisted highly complex
and effective recovery. Implement strong data backup
6
scenarios, such as the simultaneous exploitation of capabilities and ensure that backups are not exposed to
vulnerabilities in diverse systems. the same risks as primary systems.
Operational resilience testing evolves to simulate AI-
Execute periodic operational enhanced threat scenarios, and financial entities should
AI-driven attacks can trigger cascading failures across
resilience testing and evolve the test their ability to withstand AI-assisted cyber-attacks.
interconnected systems, disrupting operations in ways that
testing towards AI-enhanced threat Scalable testing frameworks may provide a structured,
traditional resilience tests may not anticipate.
scenarios but flexible threat-led approach to allow for a
proportional approach to resilience testing.
AI-driven attacks can analyse and exploit dependencies across
a financial entity’s ICT infrastructure, such as software As threat actors can use AI to map these dependencies,
Identify and monitor dependencies dependencies (e.g., open-source libraries, third-party APIs), identify single points of failure, and chain exploits for
across the full ICT infrastructure infrastructure dependencies (e.g., cloud providers, DNS maximum impact, it is important to identify and monitor
services) or operational dependencies (e.g., outsourced their dependencies, assess their criticality and risk, and
IT/SOC). implement measures to mitigate AI-driven exploitation.
AI-driven attacks target not only technical systems but also Evolvement of the management accountability should
governance weaknesses, decision-making gaps, and risk
Management body accountability to evolve from periodic oversight to continuous, informed
oversight failures. Without clear accountability at their highest
evolve from periodic oversight to engagement, integrating cybersecurity into strategic
continuous, informed decision making
level, financial entities may underestimate AI-specific risks, fail
decisions and that sufficient resources are allocated to
to allocate sufficient resources, or lack coordinated responses to
manage these risks.
complex, automated attack patterns.
Adoption of more automated monitoring processes, as
As AI-driven threats evolve rapidly, requiring real-time visibility
Implement automated risk monitoring well as faster and more adaptive escalation procedures,
and escalation to ensure timely response and decision-making,
and escalation procedure so to contain threats before they spread into wider
the frequency of risk reporting may reveal to be insufficient for
incidents.
detecting and mitigating AI-enhanced attacks.
7
Advance cybersecurity awareness to tackle new threats;
AI-driven attacks can generate unusual or highly complex
move from a purely preventive mindset to a more
Evolve cybersecurity awareness to a behavioural patterns that current security tools may not be
reactive one, empowering staff members to detect and
more reactive and proactive mindset able to identify; social engineering has also evolved the ways to
report anomalies as a complementary element in the
target and exploit financial entities’ vulnerabilities.
cybersecurity toolbox.
8