Joint ESAs public hearing on the second batch of
DORA policy products
23 January 2024
Programme
• 09:01-09:10 Opening • 11:45-13:00 SESSION 3: RTS and ITS on major incident
reporting
• 09:10-09:20 Welcoming remarks
Antonio Barzachki (Senior policy expert, EBA)
Verena Ross (Chairperson, ESMA)
• 13:00-14:00 Lunch break
• 09:20-09:30 Keynote speech
• 14:00-14:45 SESSION 4: Guidelines on cost and losses
Gerry Cross (Chairperson, Joint Committee Sub-
caused by major ICT-related incidents
Committee on Digital Operational Resilience)
Christoph Erkunt (Expert, EBA)
• 09:30-10:30 SESSION 1: RTS on oversight
harmonisation • 14:45-15:45 SESSION 5: RTS on subcontracting ICT
services
Andrea Vetrone (Senior expert, EIOPA) and
Andra Remeur (Expert, EIOPA) Djamel Bouzemarene (Senior policy expert, EBA)
• 10:30-11:30 SESSION 2: : Guidelines on oversight • 15:45-16:00 Coffee break
cooperation and information exchange between
• 16:00-17:00 SESSION 6: RTS on threat-led penetration
ESAs-CAs
testing
Andrea Vetrone (Senior expert, EIOPA)
Karole-Anne Sauvet-Frot (Senior policy officer, ESMA)
• 11:30-11:45 Coffee break
• 17:00 End of the public hearing
2
How to interact with us today: Slido
1. Go to slido.com, enter event code #DORA and your full name and
organisation (e.g. “Mario Rossi (EIOPA)”).
▪ The name and organisation used for Slido and WebEx must be identical.
2. Submit written comments/questions through Slido and upvote
questions of interest submitted by other participants.
3. If your question is very popular, we will read it during the meeting and
may ask you to raise your hand via WebEx and orally explain it.
▪ The moderator will not accept inputs which are:
▪ Submitted by people with uncompleted names
▪ Offensive
▪ Inputs related to areas of DORA not covered during this event, will be given a lower
priority compared to those in scope
▪ We will try to archive all inputs before each session.
3
How to interact with us today: WebEx
1. If your input on Slido is selected and the moderator calls your name, you
will have to raise up your hand in WebEx by using the “” button
2. Once the moderator gives you the word, you will receive a prompt on your
screen to unmute yourself.
▪ Please keep your intervention to max. 2 minutes to also allow others to share their
views. Always indicate your name and organisation.
▪ Given time constraints, we kindly ask your understanding that not all participants
may get the possibility to make an oral intervention.
▪ Don’t raise up your hand unless your name is called. It doesn’t worth it!
4
Welcoming remarks
Verena Ross, Chairperson of ESMA
Keynote speech
Gerry Cross, Chairperson of the Joint Committee sub-committee on Digital Operational Resilience
Purpose of the public hearing
The ESAs organise ‘public hearings’ for its Technical Standards and Guidelines to allow
interested parties to ask clarification questions.
• The purpose of the hearing is for the ESAs to present a summary of the Consultation papers (CPs),
reproduce the questions of the CP, and ask attendees whether they require additional explanations or
clarifications from ESA staff to be able to answer the questions in the CP.
• The public hearing does, therefore, not replace written responses to the CP, as it is only through written
responses that the ESAs are able to give the views of stakeholders the required consideration.
• The slides presented today will be shared on the ESAs websites after the event.
7
Timeline of the second batch of policy mandates
DORA Publication/
entered into Submission of final
force drafts to the EC
Public
consultation
Assessment of
16 Jan ‘23 Development of Consultation 8 Dec ‘23 4 Mar ‘24 responses, 17 July
Papers on draft policy mandates development of ‘24
final drafts
8
SESSION 1: RTS on oversight harmonisation
Andrea Vetrone – Senior Expert, EIOPA
Andra Remeur – Expert, EIOPA
Key features of DORA oversight framework
(Art. 31-44)
Objectives
• Strengthen the digital operational resilience of financial entities relying on critical ICT third-party service providers
(CTPPs) to preserve the financial stability and the integrity of the internal market for financial services.
• Promote convergence and efficiency on supervisory approaches when addressing ICT third–party risks in the financial
sector.
Key Features
• ESAs to assess if CTPPs have in place adequate processes to manage the risks they may pose to financial entities
(FEs)
• Lead Overseer (LO) can issue recommendations to the CTPPs following general investigations or onsite inspections.
The CTPP is not obliged by law to comply.
• Competent authorities (CAs) may require the FEs they supervise to take measures to address the risks related to the
recommendations.
• ESAs and CAs to cooperate closely in the designation and day-to-day oversight of the CTTPs.
10
Overview of the mandate
• According to the mandate (Article 41(1)), the RTS shall specify:
a) the information to be provided by an ICT third–party service provider in the application for a voluntary request to be
designated as critical;
b) the information to be submitted by the ICT third–party service providers that is necessary for the Lead Overseer (LO) to
carry out its duties;
c) the criteria for determining the composition of the joint examination team, their designation, tasks, and working
arrangements;
d) the details of the competent authorities’ assessment of the measures taken by CTPPs based on the recommendations of
the LO.
• On the basis of the specific nature of the empowerment, the ESAs decided to divide the mandate in two separate RTS :
– one focusing on the areas of the mandate having a direct impact on financial entities and ICT third party service providers
(points (a), (b) and (d) above). Focus of today.
– the other one on the requirements to be followed by the competent authorities in relation to the joint examination team (point
(c) above).
• The RTS covering point (c) will be publicly consulted from mid-April for one month (tentative schedule).
11
Structure of the RTS
Article 1 - Information to be provided by ICT third-party service providers in the application for a
Chapter 1
voluntary request to be designated as critical
Opt-in information
Article 2 - Assessment of completeness of application
Article 3 - Content of information provided by critical ICT third-party service providers
Article 4 - Remediation plan and progress reports
Chapter 2
Article 5 - Structure and format of information provided by critical ICT third-party service providers
Info from CTPPs to LO
Article 6 Information on subcontracting arrangements provided by critical ICT third-party service
providers
Chapter 3
Article 7 - Competent authorities’ assessment of the risks addressed in the recommendations of the
CAs assessment of
Lead Overseer
LO’s recommendations
12
Principles followed while developing the RTS
The primary goal of the draft RTS is to instore efficient oversight conditions vis-à-vis CTPPs, FEs, and CAs across the
Union to avoid legislative fragmentation while ensuring the stability of the financial sector.
• An ICT provider submitting a voluntary opt-in request to the ESAs shall fill it in with the objective to demonstrate its criticality
Chapter 1
to the ESAs.
Opt-in information • A complete application contains all the information included in Article 1 of the RTS and only complete applications can be
used to assess the criticality of an ICT provider opting in.
• Information provided by the CTPPs should relate to the minimum required topics covered by the LO’s assessment and it
should be an open list of information as it allows for flexibility and adaptation since new trends and topics may emerge.
• To ensure an effective monitoring of actions/remedies relating to the recommendations, the CTPPs share (upon LO request):
Chapter 2
(i) interim and (ii) final reports on those actions/remedies with the LO.
Info from CTPPs to LO
• Information shall be provided according to the structure and in the format indicated by the LO.
• Reporting on CTTP’ sub-contracting are based (but do not mirror) the requirements for FEs in the ITS on the register of
information developed according to Art. 28(10).
• CAs monitor and assess the extent to which the FEs are exposed to the risks identified in the LO’s recommendations, while
Chapter 3
the LO monitors and assesses the implementation by the CTPPs of actions and remedies to comply with them.
CAs assessment of • CAs and LO should share information useful to achieve their respective tasks. When asking information to the CAs about their
LO’s recommendations assessment of the exposure of the FEs to the risks identified in the recommendations, the LO should consider that the
objective of the request is to evaluate the actions and remedies of the CTPPs.
13
Opt-in information (Article 1)
• General information on the ICT third party service provider opting-in, including on its corporate structure and market share of
the service provider in the financial sector (points (a) to (e))
• Clear description of the ICT services provided and of the financial entities receiving services, including, where available,
information on the type of functions of the financial entities supported and if the latter are critical (points (f) and (g))
• Link with already designated CTPPs, both as customers and service providers to the ICT third-party service provider opting-in
(points (h) and (k))
• A self-assessment of criticality covering (i) the degree of substitutability (considering: mkt share, nr. of competitors, specificities
of services offered) and (ii) knowledge of alternative ICT TPPs providing similar ICT services (point (i))
• Information on future strategy and investment plans relating to the ICT services and infrastructure provided and in relation to
the corporate or management structure (point (j)
• If the ICT third party service provider opting-in is part of a group, the information should refer to the ICT services provided by
the group as a whole (Art. 1.2)
14
Information to be provided by CTPPs (Article 3.2)
• Information relating to the arrangements between CTPPs and FEs and CTPPs and their subcontractors (point (a))
• Organisational structure, major shareholders, market share per type of service and internal governance arrangements of the
CTPPs (points (b) to (e)
• Meeting minutes of the management body and other internal relevant committees (point (f)
• Information on the following frameworks: (i) ICT security and data protection, (ii) risk management* (ii) incident management*,
(iii) change management* (iv) response and recovery, (v) ICT third-party management. ,(points (g), (l), (m), (o)
• Information about measures taken by the CTPPs to address risks arising from the provision of ICT services by the CTPPs or
their subcontractors (point k)
• Information about performance monitoring, security monitoring, incident tracking, reporting mechanisms relating to service
performance, incidents and compliance to SLAs between CTPPs and FEs (point (n)
• Offering to their customers in relation to data portability, application portability and interoperability ,(point (h)
• Exact locations of data centres and production centres in EU and outside EU and information about service provision from third
countries including relevant legal provisions (points (i) and (j)
* Relating to both the CTPPs and their subcontractors
15
Information to be provided by CTPPs (Article 3.2) cont.
• Extractions from monitoring and scanning systems and from production pre-production and test systems of the CTPPs or their
subcontractors (points (p) and (q)
• Compliance and audit reports or certifications relating to the CTPPs or their subcontractors (point (r)
• Information about assessments evaluating the suitability and integrity of individuals holding key positions within the CTPPs
(point s)
• Information about the remediation plan to address the recommendations issued by the LO (point t)
• information about employee training schemes and security awareness programs of the CTPPs staff (point u)
• Information about the activities of the CTPPs and financial statements, including information on the budget and resources
related to ICT and security (point v)
• Other relevant information needed by the LO to monitor the provision of the ICT services provided by the CTPPs and to carry
out its oversight duties in accordance with the requirements of DORA (point w)
16
Remediation plan and progress reports (Article 4)
• The CTPPs shall provide to the LO:
– A remediation plan outlining actions/to mitigate the risks identified in the recommendations.
The remediation plan shall be provided when the CTPP notifies its intention to follow the LO recommendation and be
consistent with the timeline indicated by the LO.
– Interim progress reports (and supporting documents).
– Final reports (and supporting documents).
Structure and format of the information (Article 5)
• CTPPs shall:
– provide the requested information to the LO through the secure electronic channels indicated by the LO in its request.
– Follow the structure indicated by the LO in the information request.
– provide a clear indication of where the requested documentation can be found.
17
Information on subcontracting (Article 6 and Annex I)
• The CTPPs shall provide to the LO information on subcontracting arrangements belonging to the following dimensions:
– General information on the reporting CTPP (e.g. name, LEI)
– Overview of subcontracting arrangements (e.g. type of ICT services performed by subcontractors and mapping of the
arrangements)
– General information on subcontractors (e.g. name, LEI, contact person, expertise and knowledge in the field of contracted
services)
– Description of the services provided by subcontractors
– Risk management and compliance (e.g. CTPP’s risk assessment on subcontractors)
– Business continuity and contingency planning
– Description of the reporting mechanisms
– Remediation and incident management
– Certifications and audits
18
Questions for consultation
1. Do you agree with the content of information to be provided by ICT third party providers in the application for a voluntary
request to be designated as critical? (Article 1)
2. Is the process to assess the completeness of opt-in application clear and understandable? (Article 2)
3. Is the list of information to be provided by critical ICT third-party service providers to the Lead Overseer that is necessary to
carry out its duties clear and complete? (Article 3)
4. Do you agree with the content of Article 4 on remediation plan and progress reports?
5. Is the article on the structure and format of information provided by the critical ICT third-party service provider appropriate
and structured? (Article 5)
6. Is the information to be provided by the critical ICT third-party service provider to the Lead Overseer complete, appropriate
and structured? (Article 6 and Annex I)
7. Is Article 7 on competent authorities’ assessment of the risks addressed in the recommendations of the Lead Overseer
clear?
8. Do you agree with the impact assessment and the main conclusions stemming from it?
19
SESSION 2: Guidelines on oversight cooperation
Andrea Vetrone - Senior Expert, EIOPA
20
Overview and scope of the mandate
• Article 32(7) mandates the ESAs to issue guidelines on the cooperation between the ESAs and CAs covering:
– the detailed procedures and conditions for the allocation and execution of tasks between competent authorities and the
ESAs; and
– the details on the exchanges of information which are necessary for competent authorities to ensure the follow–up of
recommendations according to Article 35(1), point (d), addressed to critical ICT third–party service provider.
• The guidelines cover the articles 31 to 44 of DORA (chapter V – Section II oversight framework)
Excluded from the scope of the guidelines:
– Articles and tasks applying only to CAs or ESAs (e.g. art 43 on oversight fees)
– Articles and tasks applying only to FEs or CTPPs (e.g. Art. 35(5) on CTTP’s cooperation with LO in good faith)
– Cooperation ESAs-CAs in the context of Oversight Forum or Joint Oversight Network
– Aspects relating to the criteria to designate CTPPs or the composition of the joint examination teams
21
Structure of the Guidelines
The primary goal of the draft guidelines is to achieve efficient and effective cooperation between the actors in the
supervisory community and to ensure that information is shared transparently on a need-to-know basis with the objective
to ensure timely and successful results of the oversight framework.
General considerations
Language, contact points, communication means and resolution of divergence of opinions.
Guidelines 1 to 4
Designation of CTPPs
Information exchange between LO, CAs and OF in the context of CTPPs designation.
Guidelines 5 and 6
Oversight activities Procedures and information exchanges in relation to: (i)oversight plan; (ii) general investigations;
(iii) inspections (iv) measures concerning CTPPs taken by CAs in agreement with the LO.
Guidelines 7 to 10
Follow-up of
General principles and information exchanges including in case of CAs decision to require FEs to
recommendations
suspend/terminate contracts with CTPPs.
Guidelines 11 to 13
Final provisions Application date and review clause 4 years after publication.
22
Overview of the guidelines
Guideline 1 In addition to the definition of English as standard language for communication and the need to
nominate contact points, the GL introduces the obligation for the ESAs to implement an online tool
Language, communication means,
contact points and accessibility to ensure the secure and confidential sharing of information between ESAs and CAs.
Guideline 2
The specific timelines set in the guidelines can be adjusted by the LO in consultation with CAs.
Timelines
Guideline 3
In case where no mutually agreed solution is reached, LO should present the different of opinions
Difference of opinion between of CAs and ESAs to the OF which will present its view to find a mutually agreed solution.
ESAs and CAs
Guideline 4
Where possible, CAs and ESAs should share information stemming from their dialogue with NIS
Info exchange between ESAs and authorities.
CAs with NIS Authorities
Guideline 5
CAs should transmit to the OF: (i) the full register of information (ii) info at CAs disposal to facilitate
Info for the criticality assessment the criticality assessment.
submitted by CAs to the OF
Guideline 6
ESAs should transmit to the CAs: (i) general info on the CTPPs (ii) changes to the structure of the
Info on CTPPs designation management of the subsidiary in the EU ex Art. 31(13); (iii) starting date of oversight.
submitted by ESAs to CAs
23
Overview of the guidelines
Guideline 7 LO to share oversight plan and its updates to relevant CAs including info on: (i) type of oversight
activity; (ii) high-level scope and objectives; (iii) timeframe; (iv) FTEs needed; (v) staff profile.
Annual oversight plan
Guideline 8 LO to inform relevant CAs of the identity of authorised persons for the general investigation or
inspection.
General investigation & inspection
Guideline 9
Process to share info and obtain LO agreement on planned (shared after receiving oversight plan)
Measures by CAs concerning and ad hoc measures concerning CTPPs.
CTPPs
LO to share to relevant CAs: (i) scope of the request for information submitted to CTPPs; (ii) major
ICT related incident reported by the CTPPs to the LO; (iii) changes in the ICT third-party risk
Guideline 10
management strategy of the CTPP; (iv) important risks to the provisioning of ICT services; (v)
Additional info exchange between
reasoned statement by CTPP on the oversight plan.
LO and CAs
If a CTPP liaise with CAs in relation to oversight, CAs to share with LO content of these exchanges.
Guideline 11 CAs: (i) PoC for FEs (ii) responsible to follow-up risks identified in LO’s recommendations with FEs.
General principles for follow-up LO: (i) PoC for CTPPs (ii) responsible to follow-up LO’s recommendations with CTPPs.
24
Overview of the guidelines
Guideline 12 LO to share to relevant CAs: (i) notification of CTPP to follow LO’s recommendations; (ii) reasoned
explanation of the CTPP for not following LO’s recommendations and the related LO’s assessment;
Info exchanges to ensure follow up
of recommendations (iii) progress reports and the related LO assessment; (iv) decision to impose a periodic penalty
payment (v) failure of the CTPP to send the notification after issuance of recommendations.
CAs to share with LO in case CTPPs do not endorse LO’s recommendations: (i) notification to FEs
in case CAs believes the FEs do not consider or sufficiently address the risks in LO’s
recommendations; (ii) individual warnings issued according to Art. 42(7); (iii) outcome of the
consultation with NIS Authorities ex Art. 42(5); (iii) changes to FEs’ arrangements with CTPPs to
address the risks in LO’s recommendation and (iv) start of execution of exit strategies from CTPPs
by FEs.
GL 12 provides also cases when LO’s recommendations are considered not endorsed by CTPPs
Guideline 13 1) CAs to inform LO intention to notify a FE of the possibility of a CA decision if the FE does not
adopt contractual arrangements to address risks included in the recommendation ex Art. 42(4).
Decision to FEs to suspend /
terminate a service / contract
2) LO to assess the impact of that decision on the concerned CTPP
with a CTPP
3) In case two or more CAs plan (or have) to take a decision sub 1, LO should inform about
inconsistent supervisory approaches that could lead to an unlevel playing field.
25
Questions for consultation
1. For each guideline, do you consider the Guideline to be clear, concise and comprehensible?
2. Taking into account the specific scope of these Guidelines, do you consider that these Guidelines cover all the instances
where cooperation and information exchange between CAs and the LO is necessary?
3. Do you consider that the implementation of these Guidelines will contribute to adequate cooperation and information
exchange between the ESAs and CAs in the conduct of oversight activities?
4. What are your main expectations regarding the impact on financial entities and CTPPs of the application of these
Guidelines?
26
SESSION 3: RTS and ITS on major incident reporting
Antonio Barzachki - Senior policy expert, EBA
27
Background
DORA has introduced a harmonised and streamlined framework for reporting of major ICT-relates incidents where FEs
• establish and implement an ICT-related incident management process to detect, manage and notify ICT-related incidents.
• report major ICT-related incidents to the competent authority by way of initial notification, intermediate report and final report.
• report, on voluntary basis and depending on the criticality of the services at risk, significant cyber threats to the relevant competent
authority under DORA.
Major ICT-related incidents are classified based on six criteria set out in DORA
• Clients, financial counterparts or transactions affected and reputational impact
• Data losses
• Duration and service downtime
• Criticality of the services affected
• Geographical spread
• Economic impact
RTS on criteria for classification of major ICT-related incidents and significant cyber threats (under Art. 18(3) DORA)
Developed and published on 17 January 2024. The RTS specifies the criteria and their thresholds for major ICT-related incidents; the criteria and
materiality thresholds for determining significant cyber threats, the criteria for competent authorities to assess relevance of the incident to other
Member States and the details to be shared with other competent authorities.
28
Overview of the legal mandates conferred on the ESAs
Article 20(a)
RTS on the content and timelines for reporting major ICT-related incidents and significant cyber threats
The ESAs, through the Joint Committee, and in consultation with the ECB and ENISA, shall develop common draft RTS in order to :
i. establish the content of the reports for major ICT-related incidents in order to reflect the criteria laid down in Article 18(1) and
incorporate further elements, such as details for establishing the relevance of the reporting for other Member States and whether it
constitutes a major operational or security payment-related incident or not;
ii. determine the time limits for the initial notification and for each report referred to in Article 19(4);
iii. establish the content of the notification for significant cyber threats.
The ESAs shall take into account the proportionality criteria set out in Article 20 DORA and be consistent with the approach for incident
reporting under Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2).
Article 20(b)
ITS on the forms, templates and procedures for reporting major ICT-related incidents and significant cyber threats
The ESAs, through the Joint Committee, and in consultation with the ECB and ENISA, shall develop common draft ITS in order to establish
the standard forms, templates and procedures for financial entities to report a major ICT-related incident and to notify a significant cyber
threat.
29
Time limits for reporting major ICT-related incidents (RTS)
Initial • As soon as possible within 4 hours from classification of the incident
notification • No later than 24 hours from detection of the incident
The earliest between:
• 72 hours from the classification of the incident as major (Art. 6(1)(b) of the RTS)
Intermediate • when regular activities have been recovered and business is back to normal (Art. 6(1)(b) RTS)
report • as soon as the status of the original incident has changed significantly (Art. 19.4 DORA)
• when the handling of the incident has changed based on new information (Art. 19.4 DORA)
Submit a revised intermediate report if status update available or upon request from competent authority
• No later than 1 month from classification of the incident
Final report
• The day after the incident is fully resolved
Where the submission deadline of an intermediate or final report falls on a weekend/bank holiday, FEs may submit the report in the first hour of
the next working day, unless the incident has cross-border impact, the FE is a significant institution, systemic at national level or a financial market
infrastructure.
30
Content of the major incident notification/reports (RTS&ITS)
• Type of report
General • Name, type and LEI code of the reporting and/or affected financial entity
information • Contact details of responsible persons within the affected financial entity or a third-party reporting
• Identification ofthe parent undertaking ofthe group, where applicable; and Reporting currency
• Date and time of detection and classification of the incident
• Description of the incident and information on its origin
Initial
• Classification criteria met
notification
• Impact in other Members States or to other financial entities and/or third-party providers
• Information whether the incident is recurring;indication of activation of business continuity plan
• Type of the incident
• Information about the classification and thresholds that trigger the incident report
• Discovery of the incident and whether the incident originates from a third-party provider or another financial entity
Intermediate • Information about affected functional areas,business processes and infrastructure components
report • Communication to clients and/or financial counterparts or reporting to other authorities, where applicable;
• Temporary actions/measures taken to recoverfromthe incident
• Information on vulnerabilities exploited and indicators of compromise, whereapplicable
• Others
31
Content of the major incident notification/reports (RTS&ITS)
• Date and time when the incident was resolved permanently
• Information about the root cause of the incident
• Information about direct and indirect costs and losses stemming from the incident and financial recoveries
• Information about inability to comply with legal requirements or breach of contractual arrangements
Final report
• Information on the measures/actions taken for the incident resolution and additional controls to prevent similar
incidents in the future
• Information relevant for resolution authorities
• Others
Mandatory Conditional
fields fields
Rationale behind the proposed data fields to be included in the reporting
requirements General
10 8
information
• Competent authorities to collect all essential information about the major ICT-
Initial
9 8
related incidents notification
• Financial entities to not face unnecessary reporting burden Intermediate
15 24
report
• The information collected to be useful for NIS2 and resolution authorities (due
Final report 12 15
to lex specialis nature of DORA)
TOTAL 46 55
32
Content of notifications for significant cyber threats (RTS&ITS)
• Voluntary reporting of significant cyber threats as stipulatedin DORA
Main aspects
• Simple and concise content avoiding burden for FEs and encouraging reporting
& rationale
• Leverage on data fields used for incident reporting but reflecting specificities of cyber threats
• General information about the financial entity
• Date and time of detection of the cyber threat
• Description of the significant cyber threat
• Information about potential impact
Information
• Potential incident classification criteria
requested
• Status of the cyber threat
• Actions taken to prevent materialisation
• Notification to other stakeholders
• Indicators of compromise
33
Format, templates and reporting requirements (ITS)
• A single template covering the initial notification, intermediate and final incident reports
• Description of each field and instruction to populate included in the template
• Flexibility to populate fields in subsequent reports or updates to preceding submissions
Template
• Proportionate (essential fields only, mandatoryand conditional fields)
• Aggregated reporting potentially possible at national level, subject to an agreement with the relevant competent
authority
• Specific reporting template for significant cyber threats
• Reporting at financial entity (solo) level only
• Requirements are technology neutral – no preference for any specific reporting solution
• Reporting channels should be secured and agreed with the competent authority
Reporting
• In case of inability to submit a notification/report,financial entities shall inform competent authorities within 24 hours
requirements
• Standard prudential reporting approach with requirements ensuring completeness and accuracy of information
• Outsourcing – financial entities to inform their competent authority of name and contact details, including LEI code, of
the third-party provider.
34
Overview of the questions asked
Question 1 – Do you agree with the proposed timelines for reporting of major incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning
and suggested changes.
Question 2 – Do you agree with the data fields proposed in the draft RTS and the Annex to the ITS for inclusion in the initial
notification for major incidents under DORA? If not, please provide your reasoning and suggested changes.
Question 3 – Do you agree with the data fields proposed in the draft RTS and the Annex to the ITS for inclusion in the
intermediate report for major incidents under DORA? If not, please provide your reasoning and suggested changes.
Question 4 – Do you agree with the data fields proposed in the draft RTS and the Annex to the ITS for inclusion in the final report
for major incidents under DORA? If not, please provide your reasoning and suggested changes.
Question 5 – Do you agree with the data fields proposed in the RTS and the Annex to the draft ITS for inclusion in the notification
for significant cyber threats under DORA? If not, please provide your reasoning and suggested changes.
Question 6 – Do you agree with the proposed reporting requirements set out in the draft ITS? If not, please provide your
reasoning and suggested changes.
35
Lunch break – meeting will restart at 14:00
SESSION 4: Guidelines on cost and losses caused by
major ICT-related incidents
Christoph Erkunt (Expert, EBA)
37
Overview of the legal mandates conferred on the ESAs
Mandate for the ESAs on developing GL
• In accordance with Article 11(10) DORA, CAs may request from a financial entity an estimation of aggregated
annual costs and losses caused by major ICT-related incidents
• Article 11(11) DORA mandates ESAs to develop common guidelines on the estimation of aggregated annual costs
and losses caused by major ICT-related incidents’
Approach taken by the ESAs for developing the Guidelines
• Identical delineation of costs, losses and financial recoveries with the other Technical Standards on incident
classification and on incident reporting
• Alignment with the operational risk framework for credit institutions
• Avoid posing reporting burden to financial entities
38
Key elements of the Guidelines
Delineation of the relevant reference period for the ‘annual’ aggregated costs and losses
• Set the completed accounting year as reference period and only account for those costs and losses that fall within
that period
• Use as far as possible validated financial statements for that year as data source
This aims at not posing reporting burden to financial entities as they can take the numbers from their regular
accounting
Specification which ICT-related incidents to include within a given year
Only those that have been classified as major, and
• For which the financial entity submitted a final report in the reference period, or
• For which the financial entity submitted a final report in previous accounting years but that the incident had a
financial impact in the reference period
39
Key elements of the Guidelines
Step-by-step description how to estimate the ‘aggregated’ costs and losses
• Sum up for the relevant incidents all costs and losses within the reference period
• Use definitions of costs, losses and recoveries provided in the RTS on incident classification and the ITS on incident
reporting of major ICT-related incidents
• Include adjustments to calculations from previous years in the calculation of the reference period
Description of the reporting obligations and template
• The reporting should include the annual aggregated gross costs, recoveries and net costs
• The reporting should also include the breakdown of the gross costs, recoveries and net costs by major ICT-related
incident
40
Overview of the questions asked
Question 1 – Do you agree with paragraph 7 and 9 of the Guidelines on the assessment of gross and net costs and
losses of major ICT-related incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning and alternative approach(es) you would
suggest.
Question 2 – Do you agree with paragraphs 5, 6 and 8 of the Guidelines on the specification of the one-year period,
the incidents to include in the aggregation and the base of information for the estimation of the aggregated annual
gross and net costs and losses of major ICT-related incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning and alternative
approach(es) you would suggest.
Question 3 – Do you agree with paragraph 10 and 11 and the annex of the Guidelines on the reporting of annual
costs and losses of major ICT-related incidents? If not, please provide your reasoning and alternative approach(es)
you would suggest.
41
SESSION 5: RTS to specify the elements to determine
and assess when sub-contracting ICT services
supporting critical or important functions
Djamel Bouzemarene - Senior policy expert, EBA
42
Overview of the mandate
• According to the mandate (Article 30(5)), the RTS shall specify further the elements
referred to in Article 30(2) point (a), which a financial entity needs to determine and assess
when subcontracting ICT services supporting critical or important functions.
• In accordance with Article 30(2) (a) of DORA, the contractual arrangements on the use of
ICT services shall include a clear and complete description of all functions and ICT
services to be provided by the ICT third-party service provider, indicating whether
subcontracting of an ICT service supporting a critical or important function, or material
parts thereof, is permitted and, when this is the case, the conditions applying to such
subcontracting.
43
Structure of the RTS
The structure of the RTS follows the life-cycle of arrangements regarding the
use of ICT TPSPs when subcontracting ICT services
Article 1 - Complexity and risk considerations
General considerations
Article 2 – Group application
Pre-contractual phase Article 3 - Risk assessment regarding the use of subcontractors
Article 4 - Description and conditions under which ICT services supporting a critical
Contractual phase
or important function may be subcontracted
Article 5 - Monitoring of the entire ICT subcontracting chain by the financial entity
Monitoring phase
Article 6 - Material changes to subcontracting arrangements
Exit phase Article 7 - Termination of the contractual arrangement
44
Summary of the subcontracting requirements through the
subcontracting arrangements life-cycle
Contractual
Pre phase Monitoring Exit
phase
<< Elements of increased or reduced risks >>
Risk assessment by FE Conditions for • FE to document full FE has right to
before subcontracting subcontracting subcontracting terminate agreement
• Due diligence by • Monitoring and chain (RTS on with TPSP in case of
TPSP reporting by TPSP register) • Subcontracting
• Compliance with • Subcontractor • Monitoring of full not permitted by
FE’s legal reporting towards subcontracting agreement
requirements TPSP, and FE if chain by FE • Material changes
under DORA appropriate • Assessment of KPIs despite objection
• Impact of failure • Risk assessment of against contractual or without
• Concentration risks location by TPSP conditions information
• BCP • Material changes
Periodical assessment • ICT security lead to information Fallback actions fall
against material • Audit and access and reassessment under the scope of
changes rights the RTS in ICT policy
45
Questions for consultation
1. Are the considerations on complexity and risk, and group application, appropriate and sufficiently clear? (Articles 1 and 2)
2. Is the risk assessment regarding the use of subcontractors appropriate and sufficiently clear? (Article 3)
3. Are the conditions under which ICT services supporting a critical or important function may be subcontracted appropriate and
sufficiently clear ? (Article 4)
4. Are the monitoring requirements appropriate and sufficiently clear? (Article 5)
5. Are the information and re-assessment requirements triggered by material changes to subcontracting, and the termination
rights appropriate and sufficiently clear ? (Articles 6 and 7)
46
SESSION 6: RTS on TLPT
Karole-Anne Sauvet-Frot - Senior Policy Officer, ESMA
Agenda
• The DORA TLPT RTS and the TIBER-EU framework
• Overview of the RTS mandate
• Drafting approach
• Structure of the proposed draft RTS
• Proposed draft RTS: main features
1. Identification of financial entities required to perform TLPT
2. Testing process
3. Use of internal testers
4. Cooperation
48
The DORA TLPT RTS and the TIBER-EU framework
• Threat-led penetration testing (TLPT)’ means a framework that mimics the tactics, techniques and procedures of
real-life threat actors perceived as posing a genuine cyber threat, that delivers a controlled, bespoke,
intelligence-led (red team) test of the financial entity’s critical live production systems. DORA, Article 3(17)
• Article 26(11) of DORA mandates the ESAs in agreement with the ECB to develop RTS in accordance with the
TIBER-EU framework to specify further certain aspects of a threat-led penetration testing (TLPT) framework under
DORA
The ECB TIBER-EU framework
o A TLPT framework inspired from national standards (UK, NL)
o Jointly developed by the ECB and the national central banks
o Published in 2018, and already adopted by 14 Member States
49
Overview of the RTS mandate
DORA Chapter IV - Digital operational resilience testing
Article 24 - Article 25 - Article 26 - Advanced testing of Article 27 -
DORA Level 1
General Testing of ICT ICT tools, systems and processes Requirements for
requirements tools and based on TLPT testers for the
systems carrying out of TLPT
DORA Article 26(11)
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Level 2 RTS mandate Criteria to select Use of internal Scope Cooperation when
financial entities testers Testing process financial entities
Results operate in more
than 1 MS
50
Drafting approach
• L1 already includes provisions on:
Scope of TLPT Risk management Testers
Frequency of Closure of TLPT
Some or all critical and Pooled testing to protect the FE, its
TLPT important functions in limited cases counterparts and and Attestation TLPT
Validated by authority the financial sector authority
• Based on L1, incorporation of as much as possible of the TIBER-EU Framework
• Main differences:
– Authority responsible for TLPT
– Testers
– Purple teaming
51
Structure of the proposed draft RTS
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Criteria to select Use of internal Test Scope Cooperation when
financial entities testers Testing process financial entities
RTS
Results operate in more
mandate
than 1 Member
State
Chapter I Chapter II Chapter III Chapter IV Chapter V
General provisions Criteria to identify Requirements Use of internal Cooperation and
financial entities regarding test scope, testers mutual
required to perform testing methodology recognition, final
TLPT and results of TLPT provisions
Draft
RTS
Article 1 Definitions Article 2 Identification of Articles 3 to 10 Article 11 Use of Article 12
financial entities Section I. Testing internal testers Cooperation
required to perform TLPT methodology Article 13 Entry into
Section II. Testing force and application
process
52
Proposed draft RTS
1 – Identification of financial entities
Impact By default On a case-by-case basis
on
with opt out possible on case-by-case basis based on an assessment of the criteria
financial
sector
Significant credit institutions above
certain thresholds
Draft
DORA
Financial Payment institutions above certain
stability thresholds
RTS
3 criteria concerns
Electronic money institutions above
certain thresholds
All other financial
CSDs
entities
ICT risk-
related CCPs
Trading venues above certain
thresholds
Insurance/reinsurance undertakings
above certain thresholds
53
Proposed draft RTS
2 – Testing process (1/2)
• Parties involved
• Organisational arrangements: appointment of
TLPT authority
control team and ensuring security of the financial
TLPT cyber team entity and the secrecy of TLPT
(test managers)
Threat
Intelligence
Providers • Risk management measures by control team:
requirements for testers and threat intelligence
provider in particular on minimum experience (based
Financial
entity on TIBER-EU services procurement guidelines)
Blue
Internal or
Team
external
testers
[red team] Control team
[white team]
54
Proposed draft RTS
2 – Testing process (2/2)
• Timeline (simplified)
Notification to Preparation Testing phase Closure phase End of TLPT
perform a TLPT phase [6m] [4m]
•To the •Within 3m •Targeted •Red team test •TLPT authority
financial entity Initiation threat report delivers
selected by documents, intelligence •Blue team test attestation to
TLPT authority control team report report financial entity
•Within 6m •Red team test •Test summary
scope plan
•Exchange of
specification •Active red feedback
documents team testing
•Remediation
[≥ 12 weeks]
plans
• TLPT authority validates documents, choice of testers and changes to process
• Meetings recommended at each stage of the process
• Specificities for pooled testing: TLPT authority of the designated FE to lead, remediation plan at the level of each FE
55
Proposed draft RTS
3 – Use of internal testers
DORA requirements for all DORA additional Draft RTS additional
testers requirements for internal requirements for internal
testers testers
Art 27(1)
• FEs to define policyfor the
• Suitability, reputability Art 26 (8)
management of internal testers
• Specific expertise in TI, PT and red
External testers every 3 TLPT • No impact on the FE defensive
team testing
capabilities
• Certification or adherence to code of No internal testers for SIs
• Testers to be given sufficient
conduct
Art 27(2) resources and capabilities
• Sound risk management for the FE
• TLPT authority to check experience
• Professional indemnity insurance •Approval by TLPT authority
before validating use (same as external
•FE manages conflicts of interests testers and TI providers)
•External TI provider
56
Proposed draft RTS
4/ Cooperation
Cooperation between TLPT authorities from different Member States (MS): 2 cases
• If critical functions are operated by the FE in
different MS
A financial entity providing
• TLPT authority of the FE to identify other relevant
services in at least 2 MS
TLPT authorities
• Various levels of involvement in the TLPT
Financial entities established • Possibility to conduct joint TLPTs on these financial
in several MS and belonging entities
to the same group • TLPT authorities to agree on who will lead the TLPT
57
Questions for consultation
Q1. Do you agree with this cross-sectoral approach? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
General approach Q2. Do you agree with this approach on proportionality? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as
needed.
Q3. Do you agree with the two-layered approach proposed to identify financial entities required to perform TLPT? If not, please
provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Criteria to select FEs
Q4. Do you agree with the proposed quantitative criteria and thresholds in Article 2(1) of the draft RTS to identify financial entities
required to perform TLPT? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Q5. Do you consider that the RTS should include additional aspects of the TIBER process? If so, please provide suggestions.
Q6. Do you agree with the approach followed for financial entities to assess the risks stemming from the conduct of testing by means
of TLPT? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Q7. Do you consider the proposed additional requirements for external testers and threat intelligence providers are appropriate? If not,
please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording or thresholds as needed.
Testing process Q8. Do you think that the specified number of years of experience for external testers and threat intelligence providers is an
appropriate measure to ensure external testers and threat intelligence providers of highest suitability and reputability and the
appropriate knowledge and skills? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as needed.
Q9. Do you consider the proposed process is appropriate? If not, please provide detailed justifications and alternative wording as
needed.
Q10. Do you consider the proposed requirements for pooled testing are appropriate? If not, please provide detailed justifications and
alternative wording as needed.
Q11. Do you agree with the proposed requirements on the use of internal testers? If not, please provide detailed justifications and
Internal testers
alternative wording as needed.
Q12. Do you consider the proposed requirements on supervisory cooperation are appropriate? If not, please provide detailed
Cooperation
comments and alternative wording as needed.
Q13. Do you have any other comment or suggestion to make in relation to the proposed draft RTS? If so, please provide detailed
Any other comments
justifications and alternative wording as needed.
58
Timeline of the second batch of policy mandates
DORA Publication/
entered into Submission of final
force drafts to the EC
Public
consultation
Assessment of
16 Jan ‘23 Development of Consultation 8 Dec ‘23 4 Mar ‘24 responses, 17 July
Papers on draft policy mandates development of ‘24
final drafts
59
Annex
Q&A on Regulation
• The objective of ESAs Question and Answer process on regulation (Q&A process) is to ensure consistent and effective
application of European regulation and to foster supervisory convergence in the EEA within the ESAs respective scope of
action, including DORA.
• Any natural or legal person, including financial institutions, competent authorities and Union institutions and bodies can use the
Q&A process for submitting questions relating to the practical application or implementation of the applicable laws, regulations
and guidelines.
– EBA’s Questions and Answers (europa.eu)
– EIOPA’s Questions and Answers (europa.eu)
– ESMA’s Questions and Answers (europa.eu)
61