Provisional request to the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) for technical
advice on two delegated acts specifying further criteria for critical ICT third-
party service providers (CTPPs) and determining fees levied on such providers
With this provisional mandate, the Commission seeks ESAs' technical advice on two delegated
acts based on empowerments established in the Regulation on Digital Operational Resilience
for the Financial Sector (the "Regulation"). The delegated acts would be adopted in accordance
with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
The present mandate is provisional as the Regulation has not yet entered into force. The
European Parliament and the Council have adopted the Regulation and accompanying Directive
on 10 and 28 November 2022, respectively. The acts are expected to be published in December
2022 and enter into force in January 2023.
The Commission reserves the right to revise and/or supplement this mandate. The technical
advice received on the basis of this mandate should not prejudge the Commission's final
decision.
The mandate follows the Regulation - Article 31(6) and Article 43(2) - the Communication
from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council - Implementation of Article
290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union1 (the "290 Communication"), the
Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament, the Council of the European
Union and the European Commission on Better Law-Making2 and the Framework Agreement
on Relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission3 (the
"Framework Agreement").
According to Article 31(6) of the Regulation and with regard to the criteria the ESAs must take
into account when determining the critical nature of ICT third-party service providers, the
Commission shall adopt a delegated act to further specify these criteria. In addition, according
to Article 43(2) of the Regulation and with regard to the fees levied on CTPPs, the Commission
shall adopt a delegated act to determine the amount of the fees and the way in which they are
to be paid.
***
The European Parliament and the Council shall be duly informed about this mandate.
1 COM/2022/230 final
2 OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1–14
3 OJ L 304, 20.11.2010, p. 47–62
1
In accordance with the Declaration 39 on Article 290 TFEU, annexed to the Final Act of the
Intergovernmental Conference which adopted the Treaty of Lisbon, signed on 13 December
2007, and in accordance with the established practice within the European Securities
Committee, the Commission will continue, as appropriate, to consult experts appointed by the
Member States in the preparation of possible delegated acts in the financial services area.
In accordance with point 15 of the Framework Agreement, the Commission will provide full
information and documentation on its meetings with experts appointed by the Member States
within the framework of its work on the preparation and implementation of Union legislation,
including soft law and delegated acts. Upon request by the Parliament, the Commission may
also invite Parliament's experts to attend those meetings.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts pursuant to Article 31 and Article 43 of
the DORA Regulation. As soon as the Commission adopts a possible delegated act, the
Commission will notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and the Council.
1. Context
1.1. Scope
As part of the 2020 Digital Finance package, the Commission put forward a legislative proposal
for a Regulation on the Digital Operational resilience of the Financial Sector (DORA)
accompanied by a Directive. The Council and the European Parliament reached on 10 May
2022 a political agreement, later formally endorsed by the two co-legislators on 29 June 2022
and 13 July 2022, respectively. The final adoption took place on 10 November 2022 and on 28
November by the European Parliament and the Council, respectively. Publication in the Official
Journal of the EU is expected for December 2022. The texts will enter into force on the
twentieth day following their publication.
The Regulation will create a comprehensive framework addressing various, core components
of the digital operational resilience of financial entities. It will enhance the overall conduct of
ICT risk management, establish testing rules for ICT systems, increase financial supervisors’
awareness of cyber risks through an EU harmonized incident reporting scheme and introduce
Union oversight to oversee financial entities’ dependency on ICT third-party service providers.
The overall objective is to strengthen and align the digital operational resilience across the
different Union financial areas.
To address potential systemic and concentration risks posed by the financial sectors’ reliance
on a small number of ICT third-party service providers, the Regulation introduces a Union
oversight framework for providers deemed critical. As Lead Overseers, each of the three
European Supervisory Authorities (EBA, ESMA and EIOPA) will have the power to monitor
on pan-European scale the activity of CTPPs in the context of the ICT services they provide to
the financial sector.
2
In accordance with Article 31 of the Regulation, an ICT third-party service provider that is
considered critical to the stability and integrity of the Union financial system, will be designated
by the ESAs (through the Joint Committee) as a CTPP. In assessing criticality, the ESAs, upon
recommendation from the Oversight Forum, will take into account a set of criteria set out in the
Regulation. These criteria need to be further specified by a Commission delegated act.
In accordance with Article 43 of the Regulation, the Lead Overseers will charge fees to ICT
third-party service providers designated as critical, and those fees shall cover all the expenditure
incurred by the Lead Overseers in relation to the conduct of oversight tasks. The Lead Overseers
will charge fees based on a Regulation on fees to be adopted by the Commission through a
delegated act.
This provisional mandate addresses certain technical aspects of the upcoming Regulations on
fees and the designation criteria.
More specifically, in relation to the delegated act on fees, the current mandate addresses some
of the elements which are needed in the specification of the amount itself, as well as the way
and method(s) in which such fees are to be paid. In providing their advice, the ESAs could draw
on relevant experiences from both national supervisors and ESMA (when setting supervisory
fees for financial institutions).
In relation to the delegated act on specifying designation criteria, the current mandate addresses
the need for further details aimed at shaping-up the designation criteria. The input sought here
refers to several specific sets of indicators of a qualitative and quantitative nature, for each of
the criteria, minimum thresholds triggering such indicators (if applicable in the case of
qualitative indicators), and, more extensively, background information deemed relevant by the
ESAs to help in the build-up of indicators.
1.2. Principles that the ESAs should take into account
On the working approach, the ESAs are invited to take into account the following principles:
- The principle of proportionality; the technical advice should avoid excessive financial,
administrative or procedural burdens for CTPPs.
- The rule-of-law principle, which requires the respect of appropriate rights of defence for
entities subject to ESAs’ oversight.
3
- In accordance with the ESAs Regulation4, the ESAs should not be confined in their
reflections to elements that they consider should be addressed by the delegated acts itself
but, if appropriate, may also indicate the need for any further guidelines and
recommendations that accompany the delegated acts to ensure effectiveness or clarity.
- The ESAs shall determine their own working methods depending on the content of the
provisions being dealt with. Nevertheless, across the board questions should be dealt
consistently with standards of work being carried out by expert groups.
The ESAs should ensure cross-sectoral consistency, and, where relevant, cooperate with
the European Systemic Risk Board on issues related to systemic cyber risk.
- In accordance with the ESAs Regulation, the ESAs are invited to widely consult market
participants, in an open and transparent manner, and take into account the resulting
opinions in their advice. The ESAs should design this open consultation in a manner
and approach they consider proportionate, appropriate and effective given the timeline
of this advice. The ESAs should provide a detailed feedback statement on the
consultation, specifying when consultations took place, as well as the main arguments
for and against the issues raised. This feedback statement should be annexed to the
technical advice. The technical advice should justify ESAs’ choices vis-à-vis the main
arguments raised during the consultation process.
- The ESAs are invited to justify their advice by providing a quantitative and qualitative
cost-benefit analysis of all the options which they have considered and those which they
have finally proposed in the advice. The ESAs should provide the Commission with a
description of the problem, the objectives of the technical advice, options for
consideration and a comparison of the main arguments for and against considered
options. The cost-benefit analysis, that should be proportionate to the timeline of this
advice, should justify ESAs’ choices vis-à-vis the main considered options.
- The ESAs’ technical advice should not take the form of a legal text. However, they
should provide the Commission with a clear and structured ("articulated") text,
accompanied by sufficient and detailed explanations. Furthermore, the technical advice
should be presented in an easily understandable language respecting current
terminology in the Union.
4 The European Banking Authority (‘EBA’) established by Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, the European
Securities and Markets Authority (‘ESMA’) established by Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010, and the
European Investment and Occupational Pensions Authority (‘EIOPA’) established by Regulation (EU)
No 1094/2010.
4
- The ESAs should provide a comprehensive technical analysis on the subject matters
described in section 3 below, where these are covered by the delegated powers included
in:
 the relevant provisions of the Regulation;
 the corresponding recitals, or;
 the relevant Commission's request included in this mandate.
- The ESAs should address to the Commission any question to clarify the text of the
Regulation that the ESAs consider of relevance to the preparation of its technical advice.
2. Procedure
The Commission is requesting ESAs’ technical advice in view of the preparation of two
delegated acts to be adopted pursuant to the Regulation and in particular regarding the questions
referred to in section 3 of this mandate. The mandate considers the Regulation (Article 31 and
Article 43), the ESAs Regulation, the 290 Communication, the Framework Agreement and the
ESAs’ Financial Regulation.
The Commission reserves the right to revise and/or supplement this mandate. The technical
advice received based on this mandate will not prejudge the Commission's final decision.
In accordance with established practice, the Commission may continue to consult experts
appointed by the Member States in the preparation of delegated acts relating to the Regulation.
The Commission shall duly inform the European Parliament and the Council about this
mandate. As soon as the Commission adopts the delegated acts, it will notify it simultaneously
to the European Parliament and the Council.
3. The ESAs are invited to provide technical advice on the following issues
Article 43(2) of the Regulation requires the Commission to adopt one delegated act to further
specify the amount of the fees levied on CTPPs and the way in which they are to be paid by the
latter, and a delegated act to further specify the criteria to be considered by the ESAs when
assessing the critical nature of ICT third-party service providers.
3.1. Specifying the amount of fees
Article 43(1) of the Regulation specifies that the fees collected from CTPPs shall cover the
necessary expenditure in relation to the conduct of oversight tasks, including the costs which
may be incurred because of the work carried out by the joint examination teams, and the cost
of advice provided by independent experts in relation to matters falling under the remit of direct
oversight activities. The fees charged to CTPPs shall be proportionate to the turnover of the
CTPPs concerned.
5
The ESAs are invited to provide technical advice to assist the Commission in formulating
elements needed for the Commission to enact a delegated act on fees for CTPPs, and more
specifically on the following aspects:
- The ESAs are invited to detail their assessment of the estimated costs they will incur
as Lead Overseers for the oversight tasks and the work of the joint examination teams,
as well as the estimated cost of advice provided by the independent experts in relation
to matters falling under the remit of direct oversight activities. The ESAs should provide
information on their estimates and on methods of calculation, including how the
expenditure necessary for the performance of their tasks in relation to CTPPs should be
distributed to the individual overseen CTPP. The ESAs should advise on how the
surpluses/deficits in the overall oversight budget should be managed, and whether fees
should be yearly adjustable or fixed.
- The ESAs are invited to detail their assessment of the estimated costs they will incur for
the assessment of the opt-in requests sent by ICT third party service providers to be
designated as CTPPs based on article 31(11). The ESAs should provide information on
their estimates and on methods of calculation, and if such fees should be yearly updated
or fixed.
- The ESAs should suggest the timing and appropriate modalities of the payment of
the fees by the CTPPs or opt-in applicants. The ESAs are invited to advise on
appropriate schedules for collection of fees.
- According to Article 43(1) of the Regulation, the amount of a fee charged to a CTPP
shall be proportionate to the turnover of the CTPP concerned. The ESAs are invited
to provide technical advice on the appropriate method, basis and available information
for considering the turnover of the CTPP in fee calculation.
3.2. Specifying the criteria for assessing criticality
The ESAs are also invited to provide technical advice to assist the Commission in formulating
elements needed for the Commission to enact a delegated act specifying further the criteria to
be considered by the ESAs, upon recommendation of the Oversight Forum, when assessing the
critical nature of ICT third-party service providers, including in case of voluntary opt-in request
from an ICT third-party service provider based on Article 31 (11). These criteria set out in
Article 31(2) of the Regulation are the following:
- The systemic impact on the stability, continuity or quality of the provision of financial
services in the event that a CTPP would face a large-scale operational failure to provide
its services, taking into account the number of financial entities and the total value of
assets of financial entities to which the CTPP provides services.
- The systemic character or importance of the financial entities that rely on a CTPP, by
taking into account (i) the number of global systemically important institutions (G–SIIs)
6
or other systemically important institutions (O–SIIs) that rely on the CTPP, and (ii) the
interdependence between the G–SIIs or O–SIIs and other financial entities, including
situations where the G–SIIs or O–SIIs provide financial infrastructure services to other
financial entities.
- The reliance of financial entities on the services provided by a CTPP, in relation to
critical or important functions of financial entities that ultimately involve the same ICT
third–party service provider, irrespective of whether financial entities rely on those
services directly or indirectly, through subcontracting arrangements.
- The degree of substitutability of a CTPP, by taking into account (i) the lack of real
alternatives, even partial, and (ii) difficulties in relation to partially or fully migrating
the relevant data and workloads from the CTPP to another ICT third–party service
provider.
The ESAs are invited to specify the relevant indicators of a qualitative and quantitative nature
for each of the criteria of the Regulation mentioned above. This exercise would allow the
criteria themselves to be applied, in concrete, to facilitate the designation. The ESAs are also
invited to convey to the Commission any information necessary to build up and (if needed) to
correctly read / interpret such indicators.
The Commission services thus seek technical input on precise, detailed and complete sets of
indicators of a qualitative and quantitative nature, for each of the relevant DORA criteria. The
advice should also consider minimum threshold(s) (if applicable in the case of qualitative
indicators) which would need to be considered for designation subject to a further qualitative
assessment and, more extensively, background information deemed relevant by the ESAs to
help in the actual build-up and interpretation of such indicators.
The Commission services recall the importance of both the accuracy and completeness of these
elements. To be able to carry out the assessment leading to the concrete designation process,
the ESAs need to have at their disposal all relevant information and clarity of the parameters
themselves.
The ESAs are invited to reflect on the frequency of reviewing the respective delegated acts to
reflect related developments.
4. Indicative timeline
This mandate takes into consideration the time that the ESAs need in preparing their technical
advice and the timeline for the Commission to adopt delegated acts according to Article 290 of
the TFEU.
The power of the Commission to adopt these two delegated acts is granted by Articles 31 and
Article 43 of the Regulation. The European Parliament and the Council may object to a
delegated act within a period of three months, extendible by three further months. The delegated
7
act will only enter into force if neither the European Parliament nor the Council has objected
(on expiry of that period) or if both institutions have informed the Commission of their intention
not to raise objections.
The Regulation requires the Commission to adopt these two delegated acts within twelve
months from its entry into force.
For the Regulation to be fully operational and the ESAs to initiate their oversight activities, it
is of the outmost importance to start working on the matter as soon as possible. The deadline
set to the ESAs to deliver the technical advice is 30 September 2023.
8
Electronically signed on 21/12/2022 15:42 (UTC+01) in accordance with Article 11 of Commission Decision (EU) 2021/2121