Consultation Paper
on Draft Regulatory Technical Standards
to specify the detailed content of the policy in relation to the
contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting
critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service
providers as mandated by Regulation (EU) 2022/2554
0
Contents
1. Responding to this consultation 2
2. Executive Summary 3
3. Background 4
4. Draft regulatory technical standards 6
5. Annex 1: Draft cost-benefit analysis 19
6. Annex 2: Overview of the questions for consultation 29
1
1. Responding to this consultation
The ESAs invite comments on all matters in this paper and on the specific questions summarised in
Paragraph 6.
Comments are most helpful if they:
▪ respond to the question stated;
▪ indicate the specific point to which a comment relates;
▪ contain a clear rationale;
▪ provide evidence to support the views expressed/ rationale proposed; and
▪ describe any alternative regulatory choices the EBA should consider.
Submission of responses
To submit your comments, click on the ‘send your comments’ button on the consultation page by
11.09.2023. Please note that comments submitted after this deadline, or submitted via other means
may not be processed.
Publication of responses
All contributions received will be published following the close of the consultation, unless you request
otherwise. Please clearly and prominently indicate in your submission any part you do not wish to be
publicly disclosed. A standard confidentiality statement in an email message will not be treated as a
request for non-disclosure. A confidential response may be requested from us in accordance with the
ESAs’ rules on access to documents. We may consult you if we receive such a request. Any decision we
make not to disclose the response is reviewable by ESAs’ Boards of Appeal and the European
Ombudsman.
Data protection
The protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the ESAs is based on
Regulation (EU) 1725/2018 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018. Further
information on data protection can be found under the Legal notice section of EBA, EIOPA and ESMA
websites respectively.
2
2. Executive Summary
Article 28(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 requires from financial entities that they adopt and
regularly review, as part of their ICT risk management framework, a strategy on ICT third-party risk.
The strategy on ICT third-party risk shall include a policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical
or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers. The ESAs are mandated to
develop jointly draft regulatory technical standards to further specify the detailed content of this policy
in relation to the contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions provided by ICT third-party service providers.
In line with Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the draft RTS sets out requirements for the policy of financial
entities on their use of ICT third-party service providers, including ICT intragroup providers and
concerns all ICT services provided by them that support critical or important function. The RTS applies
to all such ICT services and is not limited to outsourcing arrangements.
The financial entity’s policy on the use of ICT third-party service providers is defining crucial parts of
the financial entities’ governance arrangements, risk management and internal control framework
with regard to the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers and should ensure
that the financial entity remains in control of its operational risks, information security and business
continuity throughout the life cycle of contractual arrangements with such providers.
It is crucial that financial entities perform risks assessments and due diligence processes before they
enter in contractual arrangements with ICT third-party service providers and that they ensure that they
can exit from such arrangements where necessary and ensure business continuity for the supported
critical or important function, e.g. where a service is not provided appropriately, external ICT systems
fail or where a service cannot be received any longer following imposed sanctions.
The ESAs will finalise the draft RTS following its public consultation and aims to submit it in January
2024 to the European Commission for adoption.
Next steps
The ESAs will finalise the draft RTS following its public consultation and aims to submit it in January
2024 to the European Commission for adoption.
3
3. Background and rationale
1. Article 28(2) of DORA requires from financial entities that: “as part of their ICT risk management
framework, financial entities [...] shall adopt, and regularly review, a strategy on ICT third-party risk
[…]The strategy on ICT third-party risk shall include a policy on the use of ICT services supporting
critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers and shall apply on an
individual basis and, where relevant, on a sub-consolidated and consolidated basis…”.
2. In accordance with Article 28 (10) of DORA, “the ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee, develop
draft regulatory technical standards to further specify the detailed content of the policy … in
relation to the contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions provided by ICT third-party service providers”.
3. The draft RTS has been developed considering already existing specifications provided in Guidelines
on outsourcing arrangements published by the European Supervisory Authorities (EBA, ESMA and
EIOPA) and other relevant specifications provided in the EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk
management.
4. Furthermore, when developing those draft regulatory technical standards, the ESAs have taken into
account the size and the overall risk profile of the financial entities, and the nature, scale and
complexity of their services, activities and operations.
5. In line with DORA, the draft RTS sets out requirements for the policy of financial entities on their
use of ICT third party service providers, including ICT intra group service providers and concerns all
ICT services provided by them that support critical or important function.
6. The draft RTS deals with ICT third party services providers and ICT intragroup service providers in
the same way. The risks towards those services providers may be different but the requirements
applicable to them are similar. Intra group service providers are considered to form a subcategory
of ICT third party service providers as DORA is also applied on an individual basis.
7. The use of ICT service providers cannot reduce the responsibility for the financial entities and their
management bodies to manage their risks and to comply with legislative requirements, especially
when critical and important functions are supported by ICT third party service providers. The draft
RTS includes provisions that ensure that financial entities clearly assign the internal responsibilities
for the approval, management, control, and documentation of contractual arrangements on the
use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers to support their critical or important
functions. Such provisions strengthen the accountability within the involved business areas within
financial institutions.
4
8. The draft RTS further specify the requirements for the application in a group context where this is
applicable. In this context, the EU parent undertaking or the parent undertaking in a Member State
shall ensure that the policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions
provided by ICT third-party service providers as referred to in Article 28 (2) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554, is implemented consistently in their subsidiaries and adequate for the effective
application of the RTS at all relevant levels. This is to ensure that, where applicable, a group wide
management of ICT risks can be provided for.
9. The financial entity’s policy on the use of ICT third party service providers defines crucial parts of
the financial entities governance arrangements, risk management and internal control framework
with regard to the use of ICT services provided by ICT third party providers. This policy should thus
ensure that the financial entity remains in control of its operational risks, information security and
business continuity throughout the life cycle of contractual arrangements with such providers. To
be effective, the RTS covers the whole life cycle of such arrangements and starts with the planning
phase of the buy in of ICT services, including risk assessments and due diligence processes, covers
the ongoing service delivery, monitoring and auditing, and ends with the exit from such
arrangements.
10. In order to ensure that the ICT services are provided with the needed quality and that there are no
additional material operational or reputational risks, financial entities shall assess the business
reputation of the ICT third party service provider and shall ensure that it has available the resources,
including expertise and adequate financial, human and technical resources, information-security
arrangements, an appropriate organisational structure, including risk management and internal
controls and is able to comply with the contractual and regulatory requirements.
11. The draft RTS needs to be read together with Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 which defines what are
ICT services, what is critical and important function and includes provisions on mandatory
contractual arrangements with ICT third party providers. While this RTS set out requirements for
ICT services supporting critical or important functions, Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 sets also risk
management requirements for ICT services supporting other functions that are not considered
critical or important. The draft RTS also needs to be read in conjunction with other draft RTS, e.g.
on sub-outsourcing, the register of ICT services provided and business continuity planning.
Next Steps
The ESAs will finalise the draft RTS following its public consultation and submit it to the European
Commission for adoption.
5
4. Draft regulatory technical
standards
6
COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) …/…
of XXX
supplementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the
Council with regard to regulatory technical standards for specifying the detailed content
of the policy on the contractual arrangements regarding on the use of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service
providers
(Text with EEA relevance)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council,
of 14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending
Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014
and (EU) 2016/1011 and, in particular Article 28(10) thereof,
Whereas:
(1) The framework on digital operational resilience for the financial sector established by
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 requires that financial entities set out certain key principles
to manage ICT third-party risk, which are of particular importance when financial entities
engage with ICT third-party service providers to support their critical or important
functions.
(2) To ensure the sound monitoring of ICT third-party risk in the financial sector, financial
entities, as part of their ICT risk management framework, should adopt, and regularly
review, a strategy on ICT third-party risk. In accordance with Article 28(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2022/2554, the strategy on ICT third-party risk should include a policy on the use
of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party
service providers and should apply on an individual and, where relevant, on a sub-
consolidated and consolidated basis.
(3) To ensure a consistent and uniform application by financial entities and supervisory
convergence across the European Union, it is necessary to further specify the content of
the policy referred to in Article 28(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
(4) Financial entities vary widely in their size, structure, and internal organisation and in the
nature and complexity of their activities. It is therefore necessary to take into account that
diversity while imposing certain fundamental regulatory requirements which are
appropriate for all financial entities when developing the policy regarding contractual
arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions by ICT
third party providers (here after “relevant contractual arrangements”).
7
(5) Where belonging to a group, financial entities should ensure that the policy on the use of
ICT services supporting critical or important functions by ICT third party providers is
applied in a consistent and coherent way within the group.
(6) When applying the policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions, ICT intra-group service providers, where applicable, including those fully or
collectively owned by financial entities within the same institutional protection scheme,
undertaking the provision of ICT services, should be considered as ICT third party
services providers. The risks posed by those ICT services providers may be different but
the requirements applicable to them are the same in accordance with Regulation (EU)
2022/2054. In a similar way, this policy should apply to subcontractors to ICT third-party
service providers where this is relevant in case a chain of ICT third-party service
providers exists.
(7) The ultimate responsibility of the management body in managing a financial entity’s ICT
risk is an overarching principle which is also applicable regarding the use of ICT third-
party service providers. This responsibility should be further translated into the
continuous engagement of the management body in the control and monitoring of ICT
risk management, including in the adoption and review, at least once per year, of the
policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions by ICT third-
party service providers.
(8) To ensure appropriate reporting to the management body, the policy should clearly
specify and identify the internal responsibilities for the approval, management, control
and documentation of contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting
critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers.
(9) In order to take into account all possible risks that could arise when contracting ICT
services supporting critical or important function, the structure of this policy should
follow all the steps of the life cycle regarding contractual arrangements for the use of ICT
services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service
providers.
(10) To mitigate the risks identified, this policy should specify the planning of relevant
contractual arrangements, including the risk assessment, the due diligence, and the
approval process for new or material changes to those third-party contractual
arrangements. In addition, in order to manage all risks that could arise before entering
into an arrangement with an ICT third-party service provider, the policy should specify
an appropriate and proportionate process to select and assess the suitability of prospective
ICT third-party service providers and prescribe that the financial entity assesses a non-
exhaustive list of aspects related to the business reputation, the resources including
expertise and adequate financial, human and technical resources, information-security,
appropriate organisational structure, including risk management, and internal controls
that the ICT third party service providers should have in place.
(11) For the purpose of ensuring a sound risk management in the provision of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions by ICT third-party service providers through
contract management, this policy should contain information with regard to the
implementation, monitoring and management of contractual arrangements for the use of
ICT services supporting critical or important functions including at consolidated and sub-
8
consolidated level where applicable. This includes requirements on the contractual
clauses on mutual obligations of the financial entities and the ICT third-party service
providers that should be set out in a written agreement. This policy should ensure the
financial entities’ or appointed third parties’ and competent authorities’ rights to
inspections and access to information and should also further specify the exit strategies
and termination processes.
(12) The European Supervisory Authorities have conducted open public consultations on the
draft regulatory technical standards on which this Regulation is based, analysed the
potential related costs and benefits and requested the advice of the ESA’s Stakeholder
Groups established in accordance with Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010,
Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 and Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No
1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
Article 1
Complexity and risk considerations
1. The policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided
by ICT third-party service providers shall take into account, for the purpose of Articles 3
to 11, elements of increased complexity or risk, including elements relating to the location
of the ICT third-party service provider or its parent company, the nature of data shared with
the ICT third-party service providers, the location of data processing and storage, whether
the ICT third-party service providers are part of the same group of the financial entity and
the potential impact of the related risks and disruptions on the continuity and availability
of the financial entity’s activities.
Article 2
Group application
2. Where this Regulation applies on a sub-consolidated or consolidated basis, the parent
undertaking that is responsible for providing the consolidated or sub-consolidated financial
statements for the group shall ensure that the policy on the use of ICT services supporting
critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers as referred to
in Article 28 (2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, is implemented consistently in their
subsidiaries and is adequate for the effective application of this Regulation at all relevant
levels.
Question 1: Are the articles 1 and 2 regarding the application of proportionality and
the level of application appropriate and sufficiently clear?
9
Article 3
Governance arrangements regarding the policy on the use of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions
1. As part of the strategy on ICT third-party risk referred to in Article 28(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2022/2554, and taking into account the multi-vendor strategy referred to in Article
6(9), the management body of a financial entity shall adopt a written policy on the use of
ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service
providers, and ensure its implementation on an individual and, as applicable, on a sub-
consolidated and consolidated basis.
2. The management body shall review the policy referred to in paragraph 1 at least once a
year and update it where necessary. Changes made to the policy shall be implemented in a
timely manner and where appropriate also to the relevant contractual arrangements.
3. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall define or refer to a methodology for determining
which ICT services support critical or important functions. The policy shall also specify
when this assessment should be conducted and reviewed.
4. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall clearly assign the internal responsibilities for
the approval, management, control, and documentation of relevant contractual
arrangements and shall ensure that appropriate skills, experience and knowledge are
maintained within the financial entity to effectively oversee relevant contractual
arrangements.
5. Without prejudice to the final responsibility of the financial entity to effectively oversee
relevant contractual arrangements, the policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall foresee that
the financial entity assesses that the ICT third party service provider has sufficient
resources to ensure that the financial entity complies with all its legal and regulatory
requirements.
6. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall clearly identify, in accordance with Article 5(3)
of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the role or member of senior management responsible for
monitoring the relevant contractual arrangements. This policy shall define how this role or
member of senior management shall cooperate with the control functions where it is not
part of it and define the reporting lines to the management body, including the nature and
frequency of the documents to report.
7. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that the relevant contractual arrangements
are consistent with the financial entity’s ICT risk management framework referred to in
Article 6(1), the information security policy under Article 9(4), the business continuity
policy under Article 11 and the requirements on incident reporting under Article 19 of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
8. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall require that ICT services supporting critical or
important functions provided by ICT third party service providers are subject to
independent review and included in the financial entity’s audit plan.
10
9. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall explicitly specifies that the relevant contractual
arrangements:
a. do not relieve the financial entity and its management body of its regulatory
obligations and its responsibilities to its clients;
b. shall not hinder effective supervision of a financial entity and shall not contravene
any supervisory restrictions on services and activities;
c. have provisions in place that ensure that the ICT third party service providers
cooperate with the competent authorities; and
d. have provisions in place that ensure that the financial entity, its auditors, and
competent authorities have effective access to data and premises relating to the use
of IT services supporting critical or important functions.
Question 2: Is article 3 regarding the governance arrangements appropriate and
sufficiently clear?
Article 4
ICT third-party service providers and ICT services supporting critical or important
functions
1. As part of the ICT third-party risk strategy referred to in Article 28 (2) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554, and taking into account the multi-vendor strategy referred to in Article 6(9),
where applicable, and the overall ICT risk management framework, the policy on the use
of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party
service providers shall differentiate, including for sub-contractors, between the:
(a) ICT third-party service providers that are authorised or registered by a
competent authority in a Member State or subject to the oversight framework
under Section II of Chapter V of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 or ICT third-party
service providers that are authorised or registered by a supervisory authority
from a third country and are subject to supervision or oversight and those that
are not;
(b) provision of ICT services supporting critical or important functions by ICT intra-
group service providers and by ICT third-party service providers that are outside
the group;
(c) provision of ICT services supporting critical or important functions by ICT
third-party service providers located within a Member State and the ones located
in third countries, also considering the location where the ICT services are
actually provided from and the location where the data is actually processed and
stored.
11
Question 3: Is article 4 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 5
Main phases of the life cycle for the use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions provided by ICT third- party service providers
1. The policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided
by ICT third-party service providers shall specify the requirements, including principles,
responsibilities, and procedures, for each main phase of the lifecycle of the use of such ICT
services, covering at least:
(d) the responsibilities of the management body in line with Article 5(2) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, including its involvement, as appropriate, in the
decision-making process on the use of ICT services supporting critical or
important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers;
(e) the planning of contractual arrangements for the use of ICT services supporting
critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers
including the risk assessment, the due diligence and the approval process of new
or material changes to relevant third-party contractual arrangements;
(f) the involvement of business units, internal controls and others relevant units in
respect of contractual arrangements for the use of ICT services supporting
critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers;
(g) the implementation, monitoring and management of contractual arrangements
for the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions including
at consolidated and sub-consolidated level, where applicable;
(h) the documentation and record-keeping, taking into account the requirements on
the register of information in accordance with Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554;
(i) the exit strategies and termination processes.
Question 4: Is article 5 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 6
Ex-ante risk assessment
12
1. The policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided
by ICT third-party service providers shall include the requirement to define the business
needs of the financial entity before entering into contractual arrangements on the use of
ICT services provided by prospective third-party service providers, supporting critical
or important functions.
2. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall require that, before entering into a contractual
arrangement with an ICT third-party service provider a risk assessment shall be
conducted at financial entity level and, where applicable, at consolidated and sub-
consolidated level, taking into account all the relevant requirements under of Regulation
(EU) 2022/2554 and applicable sectoral legislations and regulations. This risk
assessment shall consider, in particular, the impact of the provision of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions by ICT third-party service providers on the
financial entity and all its risks, including operational risks, legal risks, ICT risks,
reputational risks, risks to the protection of confidential or personal data, risks linked to
the availability of data, risks linked to where the location of the data is processed and
stored and the location of the ICT third-party service provider as well as ICT
concentration risks at entity level in accordance with Article 29 of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554.
Article 7
Due diligence
1. In accordance with Article 28 (4) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the policy on the use
of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party
service providers shall specify an appropriate and proportionate process for selecting
and assessing the prospective ICT third-party service providers taking into account
whether or not the ICT third party service provider is an intragroup ICT service provider
and prescribe that the financial entity assesses, before entering into a contractual
arrangement, at least whether the ICT third-party service provider:
(a) has the business reputation, sufficient abilities, expertise and adequate financial,
human and technical resources, information security standards, appropriate
organisational structure, including risk management and internal controls and, if
applicable, the required authorisation(s) or registration(s) to provide the ICT
services supporting the critical or important function in a reliable and
professional manner, the ability to monitor relevant technological developments
and identify ICT security leading practices and implement them where
appropriate to have an effective and sound digital operational resilience
framework;
(b) uses or intends to use ICT sub-contractors to perform material part of their
services;
13
(c) is located, processes or stores the data in a third country and if this is the case, if
this practice elevates the level of operational risks, reputational risks or the risk
of being affected by sanctions that may impact the ability of the ICT third-party
service provider to provide the ICT services or the financial entity to receive
those ICT services;
(d) consents to arrangements that ensure that it is effectively possible to conduct
audits, including onsite, by the financial entity itself, appointed third parties, and
competent authorities at the ICT service provider,
(e) acts in an ethical and socially responsible manner and adheres to human and
children’s rights, applicable principles on environmental protection, and ensures
appropriate working conditions including the prohibition of child labour.
2. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify the required level of assurance
concerning the effectiveness of ICT third-party service providers’ risk management
framework for the ICT services to be provided by ICT third-party providers to support
critical or important functions. This policy shall require that the due diligence process
shall include the assessment of the existence of risk mitigation and business continuity
measures and how their functioning within the ICT third-party service provider is
ensured.
3. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall:
(a) determine the due diligence process for selecting and assessing the prospective
ICT third-party service providers, including which of the elements listed in
paragraph 1 points (a) to (e) shall be used for the required level of assurance.
(b) determine that the element listed in paragraph 1 point (a) shall be used, where
the selected elements in paragraph 1 points (b) to (e) are not sufficient to ensure
an appropriate assessment of the ICT third-party service providers suitability.
The assessment of the ICT third-party provider’s suitability shall always include
at least one of the elements listed in paragraph 1 points (a) and (c).
(c) consider at least, the following elements to be used as part of the process for
selecting and assessing the prospective ICT third-party service providers:
i. audits performed by the financial entity itself or on its behalf;
ii. the use by the financial entity of relevant appropriate third party
certifications;
iii. the use by the financial entity of independent audit reports made on
behalf of the ICT third-party service provider;
iv. the use by the financial entity of audit reports of the internal audit
function of the ICT third-party provider;
v. the use by the financial entity of other relevant publicly available
information.
14
Question 5: Are articles 6 and 7 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 8
Conflict of interest
1. The policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided
by ICT third-party service providers shall specify the appropriate measures to identify,
prevent and manage actual or potential conflicts of interest arising from the use of ICT
third party service providers before entering relevant contractual arrangements and
provide for an ongoing monitoring of conflicts of interests.
2. Where ICT services are provided by ICT intra-group service providers, the policy
referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify the conditions, including the financial conditions,
for the ICT services supporting critical or important functions to be set at arm’s length.
Question 6: Is article 8 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 9
Contractual clauses for the use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions
1. The policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided
by ICT third-party service providers shall specify that the relevant contractual
arrangement shall be written and shall include all the elements set out by Article 30(2)
of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. The policy shall also include elements regarding ICT
requirements, in accordance with that Regulation, as well as other relevant European
and national regulations as appropriate.
2. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify that the relevant contractual
arrangements shall include information access, inspection, audit, and ICT testing rights.
The policy shall foresee that without prejudice to the final responsibility of the financial
entity, the financial entity shall use for this purpose:
(a) its own internal audit or an appointed third party;
(b) pooled audits and pooled ICT testing, including threat-led penetration testing,
organised jointly with other contracting financial entities or firms that use ICT
services of the same ICT third-party service provider, that are performed by
them and these contracting financial entities or firms or by a third party
appointed by them;
15
(c) third-party certifications and third-party or internal audit reports made available
by the ICT third-party service provider.
3. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall specify whether third-party certifications and
reports as referred to in paragraph 2 (c) are adequate and sufficient to comply with their
regulatory obligations and shall not rely solely on these reports over time. In this regard,
the policy shall require that the financial entity shall use of the methods referred to
paragraph 2 (c) only if it:
(a) is satisfied with the audit plan for the relevant contractual arrangements;
(b) ensures that the scope of the certifications or audit reports cover the systems and
key controls identified by the financial entity and the compliance with relevant
regulatory requirements;
(c) thoroughly assesses the content of the certifications or audit reports on an
ongoing basis and verify that the reports or certifications are not obsolete;
(d) ensures that key systems and controls are covered in future versions of the
certification or audit report;
(e) is satisfied with the aptitude of the certifying or auditing party;
(f) is satisfied that the certifications are issued, and the audits are performed against
widely recognised relevant professional standards and include a test of the
operational effectiveness of the key controls in place;
(g) has the contractual right to request the expansion of the scope of the
certifications or audit reports to other relevant systems and controls; whereby
the number and frequency of such requests for scope modification shall be
reasonable and legitimate from a risk management perspective; and
(h) retains the contractual right to perform individual and pool audits at their
discretion with regard to the relevant contractual arrangements and activate them
according to a predefined frequency.
4. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that material changes to the relevant
contractual agreement shall be formalised in a written document, dated, and signed by
all parties and shall specify the renewal process for contractual arrangements.
Question 7: Is article 9 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 10
16
Monitoring of the contractual arrangements for the use of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions
1. The policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided
by ICT third-party service providers shall ensure that the relevant contractual
arrangements specify the measures and key indicators to monitor, on an ongoing basis,
the performance of ICT third party service providers, including measures to monitor
compliance with requirements regarding the confidentiality, availability, integrity and
authenticity of data and information, and the compliance of the ICT third-party service
providers with the financial entity’s relevant policies and procedures. The policy should
also specify measures that apply when service levels are not met including, where
appropriate penalties.
2. The policy shall also prescribe how the financial entity shall assess that the ICT third
party service providers used for the ICT services supporting critical or important
functions meets appropriate performance and quality standards in line with the
contractual arrangement and the financial entity’s own policies by ensuring that:
(a) the ICT third-party service providers address appropriate reports on their
activities and services provided to the financial entity, including periodic
reports, incidents reports, service delivery reports, reports on ICT security and
on business continuity measures and testing;
(b) the performance of ICT third-party service providers is assessed with key
performance indicators, key control indicators, audits, self-certifications and
independent reviews in line with the financial entity’s ICT risk management
framework;
(c) other relevant information is received from the ICT third-party service provider;
(d) the financial entity is notified and responds to ICT related incident and
operational or security payment related incidents;
(e) an independent review and compliance audits with legal and regulatory
requirements and policies are performed;
3. The policy shall prescribe that the assessment referred to in paragraph 2 should be
documented and its results should be used to update the financial entity's risk assessment
set out in Article 6.
4. The policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall define the appropriate measures that the
financial entity shall adopt if it identifies shortcomings of the ICT third-party service
provider in the provision of the ICT services supporting critical or important functions
or the compliance with contractual arrangements or legal requirements and how the
implementation of such measures shall be monitored to ensure that they are effectively
17
complied within a defined timeframe, taking into account the materiality of the
shortcomings.
Question 8: Is article 10 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 11
Exit and termination of contractual arrangements for the use of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions
Without prejudice to Article 28 (7) and (8) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the policy
on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT
third-party service providers shall include requirements for a documented exit plan for
each ICT service supporting critical or important functions provided by an ICT third-
party service provider and their periodic review and testing, taking into account possible
service interruptions, inappropriate or failed service delivery or the unexpected
termination of a relevant contractual arrangement. The exit plan shall be realistic,
feasible, based on plausible scenarios and reasonable assumptions and shall have a
planned implementation schedule compatible with the exit and termination terms
established in the relevant contractual arrangements.
Question 9: Is article 11 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Article 12
Entry into force
This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its
publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. This Regulation shall be
binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.
Done at Brussels,
For the Commission
The President
18
5. Accompanying documents
Draft cost-benefit analysis / impact assessment
1. As per Article 15(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 (EBA Regulation), of Regulation (EU) No
1094/2010 (EIOPA Regulation) and Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 (ESMA regulation), any draft
regulatory technical standards developed by the ESAs shall be accompanied by an Impact
Assessment (IA) which analyses ‘the potential related costs and benefits’.
2. This analysis presents the IA of the main policy options included in this Consultation Paper (CP) on
regulatory technical standards (RTS) to specify the detailed content of the policy in relation to the
contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions
provided by ICT third-party service providers as mandated by Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
Problem identification
3. Financial entities’ reliance on the use of ICT is partly driven by their need to adapt to an emerging
competitive digital global economy, to boost their business efficiency and to meet consumer
demand. The nature and extent of such reliance has been continuously evolving in recent years,
helping cost reduction in financial intermediation, enabling business expansion and business
models changes, and enabling the scalability of financial activities while offering a wide range of ICT
tools to manage complex internal processes.
4. With the growing digitalisation the scope, nature and scale of third-party arrangements has
changed and increased over time. In particular, the use of ICT services provided by third parties that
support critical or important functions became more common, leading to more dependencies and
more concentrated ICT risks. In addition to the concentration of IT infrastructures in single financial
entities, high concentrations of ICT services within a limited number of third-party service
providers, including intragroup ICT service providers, have the potential to lead to risks for the
stability of the financial market, particularly if no additional safeguards would be implemented.
5. The extensive use of ICT services and their technical and global nature, have also led to increasingly
complex contractual arrangements, where contractual terms are not always tailored to the
prudential standards or other regulatory requirements to which financial entities are subject. For
example, the contractual arrangements may not provide for sufficient safeguards that allow for the
fully-fledged monitoring of subcontracted services, thus rendering financial entities unable to
assess the associated risks and competent authorities to supervise if critical and important
functions are provided in a way that complies with the regulatory requirements. Moreover, as ICT
19
third-party service providers often provide standardised services to different types of clients, such
contractual arrangements do not always cater adequately for the individual or specific needs of
financial industry actors.
6. In the absence of clear and bespoke standards at EU level applying to the contractual arrangements
concluded with ICT third-party service providers, the external factors of ICT risks have not been
comprehensively addressed. Consequently, it is necessary to set out certain key principles to guide
financial entities’ management of ICT third-party risk, which are of particular importance when
financial entities resort to ICT third-party service providers to support their critical or important
functions. Those key principles are set without prejudice that some financial entities are subject to
even wider risk management requirements that require them to manage all risks, including ICT risks
that exist in the supply chain.
7. In this context, as part of the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6(1), and the
strategy on ICT third party risk the ESAs have been mandated under Article 28(10) Regulation (EU)
2022/2554 to develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the detailed content of the
policy in relation to the contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or
important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers.
Policy objectives
8. The draft regulatory technical standards specifying the detailed content of the policy in relation to
the contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions
provided by ICT third-party service providers aims to establish a common framework for such
policies across Member States of the EU. The objective of this framework is to enable financial
entities to manage their third-party risk with regard to ICT services supporting critical or important
functions provided by ICT third-party service providers in line with the prudential requirements,
and, in this regard, to ensure a level playing field when using such services.
Baseline scenario
9. With the entry into force of DORA, financial entities must comply with Chapter V “Managing of ICT
third-party risk”, Section I “Key principles for a sound management of ICT third party risk” of DORA.
10. The above legal requirements form the baseline scenario of the impact assessment, i.e. the impact
caused by DORA is not assessed within this impact assessment, which focuses only on areas where
further specifications have been provided in the regulatory technical standards.
11. The following aspects have been considered when developing the RTS.
20
POLICY ISSUE 1: DEFINITION OF CRITICAL AND IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS
Options considered
12. Option A: relying on the definition provided under DORA but providing more detailed criteria
regarding the notion of “critical and important functions”.
13. Option B: Referring to definition of DORA only as the draft RTS is about the content of the policy.
Cost-benefit analysis
14. Specifications to the definition would lead to a higher level of harmonization. However, a too
specific definition would create the risk that it leaves out some aspects that might become more
relevant over time. In addition, considering the different types of financial entities that are subject
to DORA, relying on the definition within DORA, without the provision of detailed specifications
seems to be more appropriate.
Preferred option
15. Option B has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 2: GOVERNANCE ARRANGEMENTS REGARDING THE POLICY ON THE USE OF ICT SERVICES
SUPPORTING CRITICAL OR IMPORTANT FUNCTION
Options considered
16. Option A: Inclusion of additional specifications regarding governance arrangements:
• Clarification of responsibilities of the management body with regard to the adoption and the
oversight of the implementation of the policy on ICT services provided by third-party service
provides in relation to critical or important functions.
• Clarification of the role of internal controls in this context
• Clarification on the frequency of the policy review (at least every year and when necessary).
• Clarification that the contractual arrangements should be consistent with the ICT business
continuity policy requirement as referred to in Article 11(1) of DORA
21
• Necessary to provide for clarity regarding the continuous responsibility for ensuring that the
financial entity can be supervised, including that measures can be implemented
17. Option B: No additional governance arrangements
Cost-benefit analysis
18. The RTS includes governance requirements that aim to ensure that contractual arrangements with
third-party providers of ICT services supporting critical and important functions do not impede
financial entities from fulfilling the prudential requirements under DORA.
19. The RTS requires that the internal responsibilities and all the associated skills, experience and
knowledge are maintained within the financial entity to ensure an effective monitoring and
oversight of the contractual arrangements. This requirement is necessary to provide for clarity
regarding continuous responsibility for ensuring that the third-party provider and the financial
entity can be supervised.
20. Regarding the frequency of the policy review, DORA set out that tit should be done regularly. The
requirement to review it at least once a year was seen as necessary considering the rapid expansion
of the provision of ICT services by third part providers to financial entities, new technology and
business opportunities. In this case, it is not disproportionate that the review of the policy should
be performed annually. In case, there are no changes, then the process will still not be burdensome
for financial entities.
21. The contractual arrangements should be consistent with the ICT business continuity policy
requirement as referred to in Article 11(1) of DORA, to ensure consistency throughout the
framework.
22. These governance requirements are not expected to have material additional costs but should
provide benefits in terms of clearer regulatory and supervisory expectations to financial entities.
Therefore, their inclusion in the RTS was seen as necessary.
Preferred option
23. Option A has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 3: MAIN PHASES OF THE LIFE CYCLE FOR THE USE OF ICT SERVICES SUPPORTING CRITICAL OR
IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS PROVIDED BY ICT THIRD PARTY SERVICE PROVIDERS
Options considered
24. Option A: Specification that the policy should cover the whole lifecycle of contractual arrangements
22
25. Option B: Focus on only the implementation of contractual arrangements themselves
Cost-benefit analysis
26. The specification that the policy should cover the whole lifecycle of contractual arrangement from
pre phase to exit will ensure an appropriate risk management and move to another service provider
(in-house or third party) in the case of insufficient or failed service provision.
27. Ex-ante risk assessment, due diligence and conflicts of interest should be included to manage and
plan the provision of services and to ensure that it will be in line with financial entities’ own
regulatory requirements. Termination and exit strategies should be included to limit and manage
dependencies. Exit plans must already exist when entering into such arrangements that are critical
and important to ensure that the financial entity can react in good time if services are provided
insufficiently or if the service provider fails.
28. Option A has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 4: RISK ASSESSMENT OF ICT SERVICE PROVIDERS
Options considered
29. Option A: Same risk assessment for ICT intragroup and ICT third-party service providers
30. Option B: Different risk assessment for ICT intragroup and ICT third-party service providers
Cost-benefit analysis
31. The ex-ante risk assessment is required to be the same for both third party and ICT intragroup
service providers since these risks need to be considered at individual basis due to potential future
events like resolution or sale. Lak of such requirements at intragroup level may lead to a situation
where the same standards are not applied for internal service providers that leads to an
underestimation of risks related to ICT services.
Preferred option
32. Option A has been retained
POLICY ISSUE 5: DUE DILIGENCE OF ICT SERVICE PROVIDERS
Options considered
33. Option A: Same due diligence for ICT intragroup and ICT third party service providers
23
34. Option B: Different due diligence for ICT intragroup and ICT third party service providers
Cost-benefit analysis
35. In case of due diligence, a lighter touch approach on the ICT intragroup service providers is justified
because group entities are known by the financial entities and covered by the internal control
system. This is achieved by a proportionate application of the due diligence requirements as
foreseen under Article 7 of the draft RTS with regard to ICT intragroup service providers combined
with Article 1 on the criteria listed for the application of the proportionality principle.
Preferred option
36. Option B has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 5: LEVEL OF ASSURANCE IN DUE DILIGENCE PROCESS
Options considered
37. Option A: Use all sources available to assess the ICT third-party service provider
38. Option B: Use only sources that are independent from the ICT third-party service provider
Cost-benefit analysis
39. The policy on due diligence should specify a certain level of assurance concerning the ICT third-
party service providers’ business reputation, reliability and risk management framework. To ensure
that the required level of assurance is reached, the financial entity should use at least one source
of information that is independent from the service provider to ensure objectivity and reliability. If
the assurance provided is not sufficient or not sufficiently independent, the financial entity should
conduct audits itself or entrust external auditors with those tasks on its behalf.
40. Reliance on sources provided by the ICT third-party service provider only would not allow the
establishing of a sufficient level of assurance, due to potential lack of independence of the
assessments.
Preferred option
41. Option B has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 6: SOURCES OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST
24
Options considered
42. Option A: Identify specific sources of conflict of interest (CoI) and management requirements.
43. Option B: Do not identify specific sources of conflict of interest as these are sufficiently covered
under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 itself.
Cost-benefit analysis
44. Given that providing requirements on conflict of interest is not explicitly part of the mandate (policy
on contractual arrangements) the policy only refers to management and mitigation of COI.
However, it is important that financial entities identify all COIs (Article 28 (4) (e) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554).
Preferred option
45. Option B has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 7: CONTRACTUAL CLAUSES
Options considered
46. Option A: Include in the policy the stipulation of specific contractual clauses specified in Regulation
(EU) 2022/2554 to be included in contractual arrangements.
47. Option B: Do not include in the policy the stipulation of specific contractual clauses specified in
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 to be included in contractual arrangements.
Cost-benefit analysis
48. The clarification of supervisory expectations regarding the content of the policy on ICT third party
arrangements benefits the financial entities during the negotiations of contractual conditions and
practical deliveries and creates a level playing field.
49. Clear contractual requirements, including requirements to assure access and audit rights, lead to
minor one-off costs and reduce the ongoing costs for negotiating arrangements with ICT third-
party service providers, as they establish a non-debatable set of contractual conditions to be agreed
on. The policy shall specify that those contractual clauses shall always be in the contract and
effective otherwise financial entities cannot use ICT third-party service providers.
Preferred option
50. Option A has been retained.
25
POLICY ISSUE 8: MONITORING OF THE CONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE USE OF ICT SERVICES SUPPORTING
CRITICAL OR IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS
Options considered
51. Option A: Require the monitoring of the application of the contractual arrangements
52. Options B: Do not require the monitoring of the application of the contractual arrangements
Cost-benefit analysis
53. Continuous monitoring of service delivery is necessary, as provision of the services in the agreed
way in accordance with contractual arrangements ensures compliance of the financial entity with
applicable supervisory and regulatory requirements, including with requirements on incident
reporting.
Preferred option
54. Option A has been retained.
Overall Cost-Benefit Analysis
55. This section assesses the overall costs and benefits of the RTS.
56. The draft RTS impose a limited set of specific requirements on financial entities which mainly were
already known under the existing framework and had been specified in Guidelines (e.g. on
outsourcing) and to some of the financial entities covered by DORA and specifies the requirements
on the content of the policy regarding the use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions required under DORA.
57. The provided specifications will lead to more harmonised practices regarding the use of ICT third
party services providers when providing ICT services supporting critical or important functions. The
RTS will benefits financial entities by creating a higher level of transparency regarding regulatory
requirements and supervisory expectations.
58. Standardised requirements and harmonisation for the setting of policies lead to a reduction of costs
for implementing processes. Harmonisation should also increase the efficiency of supervision and
comparability across financial entities and across Member States.
59. The draft RTS aim to ensure financial entities have an exhaustive policy on the use of ICT service
providers supporting critical and important function that covers all the steps of the life cycle of such
ITC third party arrangements. This will facilitate the management of related risks, by ensuring that
26
appropriate risk management measures and ICT management measures are applied throughout
the lifecycle of such arrangements.
60. The content of the policy regarding the risk assessment and due diligence of ICT third party
arrangements needs to include a more thorough assessment of the ICT risks. However, costs should
be limited as the content of the policy focuses only on ICT services provided by third parties that
are supporting critical or important functions. The costs of implementing such assessments are
expected to be limited, because these policies should in principle be already in place at least partly
and part of the financial entities should already be familiar with them.
61. The RTS will trigger some costs for financial entities for updating and implementing updated
policies, which will differ depending on their nature considering that some sectoral legislation
already establishes a set of requirements for outsourcing that is quite detailed, the additional costs
should be very low for part of them. For some others that were not familiar with those
requirements the entry cost will be slightly more costly to comply with DORA requirements, On the
other hand, standardised requirements towards third party service providers will strengthen the
negotiation position of financial entities when negotiating contracts with ICT service providers.
62. The overall impact is considered low, as financial entities must already have documentation in place
regarding their organisational structure, which includes outsourcing or other third-party
arrangements.
63. Given the existing procedures and the consistency with the other legislation that is already in place
applicable to some financial entities, the cost for applying new, binding and more harmonised
procedures in the area of financial activities should be low in general and are mainly caused by the
underlying Regulation rather than the technical specifications provided in the RTS.
64. POLICY ISSUE 9: PROPORTIONALITY PRINCIPLE
Options considered
65. Option A: Introduce a principle-based proportionality article applicable horizontally to all financial
entities under the scope of DORA
66. Options B: Identify specific requirements, e.g. frequency of the review or the details of the content
of the different parts of the policy that could be applied in a proportionate manner, due diligence
requirements when the ICT third party provider is part of a group.
Cost-benefit analysis
Option A and partly B was considered. DORA already sets out a general requirement on the
proportionate application of its requirements, The draft RTS further specify some of the criteria for the
application of the proportionality principle that can be considered by financial entities and competent
27
authorities when doing the proportionality assessment. In addition, the Level 1 already foresees some
exemptions for small entities. Some proportionality was also explicitly introduced regarding the due
diligence to be performed when the ICT third party provider is part of a group.
28
6. Overview of the questions for
consultation
Question 1: Are the articles 1 and 2 regarding the application of proportionality and the level of
application appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 2: Is article 3 regarding the governance arrangements appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 3: Is article 4 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 4: Is article 5 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 5: Are articles 6 and 7 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 6: Is article 8 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 7: Is article 9 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 8: Is article 10 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Question 9: Is article 11 appropriate and sufficiently clear?
29