ESA 2023 23
29 September 2023
Joint European Supervisory Authorities’
Technical Advice
to the European Commission’s December 2022 Call for Advice on
two delegated acts specifying further criteria for critical ICT third-
party service providers (CTPPs) and determining oversight fees
levied on such providers, under Articles 31 and 43 of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14
December 2022 on digital operation resilience for the financial
sector and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No
648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011
0
Contents
Abbreviations 2
Executive Summary 4
Introduction 6
Joint advice on criticality criteria 9
Joint advice on oversight fees 30
Accompanying documents 48
1
Abbreviations
BCBS Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
CfA Call for Advice
(C)TPP (Critical) ICT Third-Party Provider
DP Discussion Paper
DORA Digital Operational Resilience Act
EBA European Banking Authority
Commission European Commission
EIOPA European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority
ESAs European Supervisory Authorities
ESMA European Securities and Markets Authority
EU European Union
FE Financial entity
FMI Financial Market Infrastructure
FSB Financial Stability Board
G-SII Globally Systemically Important Institution
IAIS International Association of Insurance
Supervisors
ICT Information and Communication Technology
ICT TPP ICT third-party service provider
IOSCO International Organization of Securities
Commissions
JC Joint Committee of the ESAs
JET Joint Examination Team
JON Joint Oversight Network
LEI Legal Entity Identifier
LFS Legislative Financial Statement
2
NCA National Competent Authority
O-SII Other Systemically Important Institution
3
Executive Summary
In light of the two delegated acts envisaged in the Regulation on Digital Operational Resilience for the
Financial Sector ("DORA"), the European Commission has requested the ESAs’ technical advice to
further specify the criteria for critical ICT third-party service providers (CTPPs) and determine the fees
levied on such providers1. This report sets out the advice of the ESAs in response to this request.
The first part of the report proposes a number of relevant quantitative and qualitative indicators for
each of the criticality criteria, along with the necessary information to build up and interpret such
indicators. Moreover, a number of minimum relevance thresholds are proposed for the quantitative
indicators, where possible and applicable. These minimum relevance thresholds should not be
understood as triggers of criticality but a minimum requirement above which the criticality assessment
could be carried out. Details of the designation procedure as well as the related methodology are
explicitly excluded from this report and shall be defined no later than six months after the adoption of
the delegated act by the Commission2, also in the context of the implementation of the oversight
framework.
The second part of the report proposes the necessary types of expenditure that shall be covered by
oversight fees, the appropriate method, basis and available information for determining the applicable
turnover of the CTPPs (which will form the basis of fee calculation) as well as the method of fee
calculation and other practical issues regarding the payment of fees. In addition, a proposed financial
contribution for voluntary opt-in requests is included in the report.
From 26 May to 23 June 2023, the ESAs have widely consulted market participants, publishing a
discussion paper on their draft advice to the European Commission. In total, the ESAs received 41
responses from various stakeholders (please refer to the annex for the detailed feedback statement).
Regarding the criticality criteria, the ESAs clarified further their proposals (in particular as regards to
the holistic nature of the criticality assessment and the outcomes of the joint-ESAs high-level exercise
on TPPs’ landscape), increased the role of critical or important functions in the assessment and further
streamlined the proposed set of indicators. Regarding the oversight fees, the ESAs have partially
adapted their advice by proposing to define the scope of the applicable turnover on a narrower basis.
Overall, market participants expressed support to the proposals related to the other issues (methods
of calculation of the fees, payment issues and treatment of the opt-in application), while requesting
further clarity on some points.
1 See Annex II.
2 See also Articles 31(6) and 57 of the DORA.
4
The ESAs remain at the disposal of the European Commission, including for the provision of further
information that could support the European Commission in preparing the two delegated acts this
technical advice is related to.
5
Introduction
Background and rationale
1. On 27 December 2022, Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and the Council
of 14 December 2022 on the Digital Operational resilience of the Financial Sector (DORA) has
been published in the Official Journal of the European Union. It entered into force on 16
January 2023 and will apply from 17 January 2025. The DORA Regulation is accompanied by
the Directive (EU) 2022/2556 amending Directives 2009/65/EC, 2009/138/EC, 2011/61/EU,
2013/36/EU, 2014/59/EU, 2014/65/EU, (EU) 2015/2366 and (EU) 2016/2341 as regards digital
operational resilience for the financial sector.
2. The DORA will create a comprehensive framework addressing various core components of the
digital operational resilience of financial entities. It will enhance the overall conduct of ICT risk
management, establish testing rules for ICT systems, increase financial supervisors’ awareness
of cyber risks through an EU harmonized incident reporting scheme and introduce Union
oversight to oversee financial entities’ dependency on critical ICT third-party service providers
(CTPPs). The overall objective is to strengthen and align the digital operational resilience across
the different Union financial areas.
3. To address potential systemic and concentration risks posed by the financial sectors’ reliance
on a small number of ICT TPPs, the DORA introduces a Union oversight framework for
providers deemed critical. As Lead Overseers, each of the three European Supervisory
Authorities (EBA, EIOPA and ESMA) will have the power to monitor on a pan-European scale
the activity of CTPPs in the context of the ICT services they provide to financial entities in the
scope of the DORA.
4. In accordance with Article 31(1)(a) of the DORA, an ICT TPP that is considered critical to the
stability and integrity of the Union financial system, will be designated by the ESAs (through
the Joint Committee) as a CTPP, excluding the four categories of providers listed in Article
31(8)3. In assessing criticality, the ESAs, upon recommendation from the Oversight Forum, will
take into account the criteria set out in the DORA. These criteria will be further specified by a
Commission delegated act.
Article 31(2):
“2. The designation referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), shall be based on all of the following criteria
in relation to ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service provider:
3 Article 31(8) of the DORA reads: “The designation […] shall not apply to the following: (i) financial entities providing ICT
services to other financial entities; (ii) ICT third-party service providers that are subject to oversight frameworks established
for the purposes of supporting the tasks referred to in Article 127(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union;
(iii) ICT intra-group service providers; (iv) ICT third-party service providers providing ICT services solely in one Member State
to financial entities that are only active in that Member State.”
6
(a) the systemic impact on the stability, continuity or quality of the provision of financial services
in the event that the relevant ICT third-party service provider would face a large scale operational
failure to provide its services, taking into account the number of financial entities and the total value
of assets of financial entities to which the relevant ICT third-party service provider provides services;
(b) the systemic character or importance of the financial entities that rely on the relevant ICT third-
party service provider, assessed in accordance with the following parameters:
(i) the number of global systemically important institutions (G-SIIs) or other systemically important
institutions (O-SIIs) that rely on the respective ICT third-party service provider;
(ii) the interdependence between the G-SIIs or O-SIIs referred to in point (i) and other financial entities,
including situations where the G-SIIs or O-SIIs provide financial infrastructure services to other financial
entities;
(c) the reliance of financial entities on the services provided by the relevant ICT third-party service
provider in relation to critical or important functions of financial entities that ultimately involve the
same ICT third-party service provider, irrespective of whether financial entities rely on those services
directly or indirectly, through subcontracting arrangements;
(d) the degree of substitutability of the ICT third-party service provider, taking into account the
following parameters:
(i) the lack of real alternatives, even partial, due to the limited number of ICT third-party service
providers active on a specific market, or the market share of the relevant ICT third-party service
provider, or the technical complexity or sophistication involved, including in relation to any proprietary
technology, or the specific features of the ICT third-party service provider’s organisation or activity;
(ii) difficulties in relation to partially or fully migrating the relevant data and workloads from the
relevant ICT thirdparty service provider to another ICT third-party service provider, due either to
significant financial costs, time or other resources that the migration process may entail, or to increased
ICT risk or other operational risks to which the financial entity may be exposed through such migration.”
Article 31(6):
“6. The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 57 to supplement
this Regulation by specifying further the criteria referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, by 17 July
2024.”
Article 31(8):
“8. The designation referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), shall not apply to the following:
(i) financial entities providing ICT services to other financial entities;
(ii) ICT third-party service providers that are subject to oversight frameworks established for the
purposes of supporting the tasks referred to in Article 127(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union;
(iii) ICT intra-group service providers;
(iv) ICT third-party service providers providing ICT services solely in one Member State to financial
entities that are only active in that Member State.”
7
5. In accordance with Article 43 of the DORA, the Lead Overseers4 will charge fees to ICT TPPs
designated as critical, and those fees shall cover all the expenditure incurred by the Lead
Overseers in relation to the conduct of oversight tasks. The Lead Overseers will charge fees
based on the DORA provisions, including the delegated act to be adopted by the Commission.
The amount of the fees and the way in which they are to be paid by CTPPs will be further
specified in the aforementioned delegated act.
Article 43:
“1. The Lead Overseer shall, in accordance with the delegated act referred to in paragraph 2 of this
Article, charge critical ICT third-party service providers fees that fully cover the Lead Overseer’s
necessary expenditure in relation to the conduct of oversight tasks pursuant to this Regulation,
including the reimbursement of any costs which may be incurred as a result of work carried out by the
joint examination team referred to in Article 40, as well as the costs of advice provided by the
independent experts as referred to in Article 32(4), second subparagraph, in relation to matters falling
under the remit of direct oversight activities.
The amount of a fee charged to a critical ICT third-party service provider shall cover all costs derived
from the execution of the duties set out in this Section and shall be proportionate to its turnover.
2. The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 57 to supplement
this Regulation by determining the amount of the fees and the way in which they are to be paid by 17
July 2024.”
6. In light of the above, on 21 December 2022, the ESAs received a request from the Commission
to provide technical advice to assist the latter on the possible content of these delegated acts.
7. The call for technical advice addresses the need for further details aimed at shaping-up the
designation criteria. The input sought refers to several specific sets of indicators of a qualitative
and quantitative nature, for each of the criteria, minimum thresholds triggering such indicators
(if applicable in the case of qualitative indicators), and, more extensively, background
information deemed relevant by the ESAs to help in the build-up of indicators.
8. It also addresses some of the elements which are needed in the specification of the amount of
fees, as well as the way and method(s) in which such fees are to be paid. In providing their
advice, the ESAs are invited to draw on relevant experiences from both national supervisors
and ESMA (when setting supervisory fees for financial institutions).
4 Article 33(1) states that the Lead Overseer shall conduct the oversight of the assigned critical ICT third-party service
providers and shall be, for the purposes of all matters related to the oversight, the primary point of contact for those critical
ICT third-party service providers.
8
Joint advice on criticality criteria
Introduction
9. Relying on third-party services, including outsourcing, is not a new phenomenon in the
financial sector. Financial entities have always cooperated with other financial and non-
financial companies.5 This has been subject to EU regulatory requirements and supervision for
a long time for most of the entities in scope of the DORA, including through effective
governance and risk management requirements and outsourcing provisions.
10. However, technological developments and digitalisation are increasing the extent and ways by
which financial entities rely on third parties within the value chain. Indeed, financial entities
are increasingly relying on technology and data services provided by third parties for their
digital transformation—a trend that has accelerated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.6
11. The ESAs also observe growing interactions between incumbent financial entities and
technology firms/ICT providers through a variety of co-operation models, e.g., partnerships,
joint ventures, outsourcing and sub-outsourcing, or mergers and acquisitions.
12. These developments are creating new opportunities for consumers and businesses.
Outsourcing to technology firms allows financial entities to focus on their core services, which
brings flexibility and efficiency gains. Yet, these developments also bring new risks and
regulatory/supervisory challenges. The growing reliance of financial entities on tech
companies may create risks to financial stability, e.g., if the same small number of companies
are being used by many firms across the financial sector and in particular if ICT services
provided by these companies support critical or important functions. As already noted,
amongst others, in the BCBS Principles of Operational Resilience7, until recently, some of the
most predominant operational risks resulted from vulnerabilities related to the rapid adoption
of and increased dependency on technology infrastructure for the provision of financial
services and intermediation, as well as the sector’s growing reliance on technology-based
services provided by third-parties.
13. The Commission invited the ESAs to specify the designation criteria for CTPPs. In particular,
the Commission is requesting sets of indicators of a qualitative and quantitative nature for
each of the four criteria set out in Article 31(2) of the DORA, which should be accompanied by
minimum thresholds triggering such indicators (if applicable in the case of qualitative
indicators). Moreover, the Commission invited the ESAs to convey any information necessary
to build up and (if needed) to correctly read/interpret such indicators as well as to reflect on
the frequency of reviewing the respective delegated acts to reflect related developments.
5 E.g. insurance undertakings with reinsurance undertakings, investment firms with clearing and settlement services
providers, banks with payment service providers and payment card schemes.
6 FSB (2020a), Regulatory and Supervisory Issues Relating to Outsourcing and Third-Party Relationships: Discussion paper.
7 BCBS Principles of Operational Resilience (2021), https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf.
9
14. The proposed indicators based on the criteria set out in Article 31(2) of the DORA should have
the following key characteristics:
a. Available: usable/underlying data available;
b. Measurable: quantifiable/assessment can be summarised in a short paragraph (for
qualitative criteria);
c. Relevant: directly linked to the topic with immediate applicability;
d. Specific: well defined, clear, and unambiguous; and
e. Timely: up to date, considering latest technological developments which are likely to
have a significant impact on TPPs’ criticality.
15. According to Article 31(3) of the DORA, where an ICT TPP belongs to a group, the criteria must
be considered in relation to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
16. With regard to the proposed minimum thresholds for certain indicators it is noted that these
are described in the CfA as being related to the potential to trigger the relevant indicators. As
no criticality determination methodology is being put forward at this stage8, such indicators
must be considered as related to relevance triggers rather than criticality triggers. Hence,
these minimum relevance thresholds should be understood as a minimum requirement above
which the criticality assessment could be carried out. How the indicators will be assessed
within the overall determination methodology will be considered at a later stage. It should be
noted that the calibration of the related data obtained from the joint ESAs high-level exercise
on ICT TPPs (2022 exercise) has been taken into account, where relevant, for the
determination of the proposed minimum relevance thresholds.
17. Moreover, the request of the Commission highlights that the ESAs should not be confined in
their reflections to elements that they consider should be addressed by the delegated acts
themselves and that their proposal should ensure cross-sectoral consistency. The majority of
the proposed indicators are expected to be informed by the data to be provided by financial
entities (falling under the scope of the DORA) via their registers of information as per Article
28(3) of the DORA. At this stage, the report proposes indicators that are considered
appropriate to designate the CTPPs consistently with Article 31(1) of the DORA. Such
constructive approach is also applied for the metrics used in the indicators, and the ESAs have
tried to define indicators allowing a balanced coverage of all the sub-sectors of the financial
sector. Additional data sources other than the registers of information have been investigated
by the ESAs and are identified in this report, where applicable.
18. Lastly, the ESAs were also invited to reflect on the frequency of reviewing the respective
delegated acts to reflect related developments. In this regard, it is considered appropriate to
ensure consistency with the review clause in Article 58 of the DORA and hence to perform a
8 Such a methodology has to be developed by the ESAs before the completion of the first CTPP designation exercise, i.e.,
before the ESAs, through the Joint Committee and upon recommendation from the Oversight Forum established pursuant to
Article 32(1) of the DORA, designate ICT TPPs that are critical for financial entities for the first time. It should be noted that
this depends also on the date of adoption of the Delegated Act, which the Commission is empowered to draft in accordance
with Article 31(6) of the DORA.
10
review on the need for potential amendments in the respective delegated acts every 3 years.
This could ensure alignment with market developments and experiences gained by the ESAs,
which is particularly relevant as this designation exercise is an entirely new task to the ESAs
and significant experience is expected to be gained over time. Moreover, such a review
frequency could facilitate an adequate timespan to assess the effectiveness of the criticality
indicators as well as the performance of the oversight activities.
Indicative process for criticality assessment
19. Taking into account the criteria set out in Article 31(2) of the DORA, and in line with the request
that “the advice should […] consider minimum threshold(s) […] which would need to be
considered for designation subject to a further qualitative assessment […]”, the ESAs propose
the following two-step indicator-based approach to perform a holistic criticality assessment
as envisaged in Article 31(2) of DORA:
Step 1: ‘Assessing ICT TPPs against a set of minimum relevance thresholds (step 1)’
20. The ESAs propose as Step 1 the assessment of ICT TPPs, which provide ICT services to financial
entities under the scope of DORA, against six quantitative indicators, alongside respective
minimum relevance thresholds9. The quantitative indicators will be considered holistically10
9 As also proposed by stakeholders during the public consultation, the minimum relevance thresholds proposed in this report
have been simulated, to the extent possible, leveraging data stemming from the joint-ESAs high-level exercise in 2022 that
involved asking a sample of financial entities across the EU financial sector to provide information on their use of ICT services
(and, where relevant, the use of services by other entities in their corporate group) from ICT TPPs. The exercise identified
around 15,000 ICT TPPs directly providing ICT services to financial entities.
10 The proposed holistic criticality assessment refers to an approach to evaluating the criticality of ICT TPPs in a
comprehensive and interconnected manner, taking into account multiple factors or dimensions rather than focusing on
individual criticality components in isolation. To the extent possible, the holistic approach involves considering the entirety
11
rather than sequentially to allow a comprehrensive assessment and reflecting all the criticality
criteria.
21. The data to assess these indicators will be sourced mainly by the registers of information
maintained by financial entities under the scope of the DORA as well as existing available data
from the ESAs and the competent authorities. Material ICT subcontractors11 will be also taken
into account to allow a comprehensive assessment of potential systemic impact on the EU
financial sector. It is important to note that the extent of subcontractors’ assessment is subject
to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA.
22. The outcome of step 1 will indicate the ICT TPPs which could proceed to further assessment
(step 2). In particular, ICT TPPs that exceed a certain number of minimum relevance
thresholds across the six indicators could be subject to a further assessment (step 2). It is
important to iterate that step 1 indicators should be considered holistically as they aim to take
into account the dimension and nature of the financial sector’s reliance on such ICT TPPs.
Step 2: ‘Further assessment of ICT TPPs (step 2)’
23. The ESAs propose in step 2, the number of ICT TPPs resulting from step 1 to undergo a further
assessment based on five additional indicators as presented further below in the document.
24. These step 2 indicators, which are also of qualitative nature and therefore do not come with
minimum relevance thresholds, should allow the ESAs to identify the relevant providers to be
considered as CTPPs at Union level taking into account evidence-based aspects. The step 2
indicators should be seen as complementary to the step 1 indicators, allowing for a more
granular assessment of the ICT TPPs that could potentially be considered as critical according
to step 1.
25. The outcome of the application of the step 1 and step 2 indicators, subject also to a
holistic/collective assessment, will be a proposed list of CTPPs to the Oversight Forum, which
provides a respective recommendation to the ESAs Joint Committee.
26. As mentioned above, the details on the collective application of steps 1 and 2 are out of scope
of this report, however, the ESAs consider it appropriate to develop a methodology in this
regard, also proposed by the market participants in the context of the public consultation. The
finalisation of this methodology should follow no later than six months after the adoption of
the related delegated act by the Commission and in the context of the implementation of the
oversight framework.12
of criticality dimensons in order to form a complete and balanced assessment. Choosing a holistic approach for the criticality
assessment of ICT TPPs emphasizes the interconnectedness and complexity of the subject matter and aims to capture a more
complete and integrated picture, enabling a more informed understanding of the ICT TPP landscape at EU level.
11 As per Article 4(1)(b) of the consultation paper on the ITS on the register of information, the register of information includes
information on all the material subcontractors when an ICT service provided by a direct ICT TPP is supporting a critical or
important function of the financial entities.
12 See also Articles 31(6) and 57 of the DORA.
12
Related issues
27. If an assessed ICT TPP belongs to a group, the criticality criteria shall be considered in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole in line with Article 31(3) of the DORA. As
a follow-up to some questions during the public consultation, it is important to note that
information regarding the group assessment will be mainly sourced via the registers of
information maintained by financial entities under the scope of the DORA. For designation
purposes, this information could be supplemented by publicly available information such as
LEI databases.
28. It is important to note that material subcontractors should be appropriately captured during
the criticality assessment, hence to be considered across all the indicators. The data on
subcontractors will be sourced mainly by the registers of information as well as by
information directly provided by CTPPs (available only after first concrete experiences with
designated CTPPs). The assessment of material ICT subcontractors13 could allow a
comprehensive assessment of potential systemic impact on the EU financial sector. It is
important to note that the extent of subcontractors’ assessment would be subject to the final
ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA. In light of Article 3(28) of
the DORA, an ICT subcontractor established in a third country is considered a legal person that
has entered into a contractual arrangement with an ICT TPP for the provision of ICT services
to financial entities supervised by the competent authorities identified in Article 46 of the
DORA.
29. All financial entities, ICT TPPs, including ICT intra-group providers, which meet the conditions
set out by Article 31(8) of the DORA14, will be excluded from the designation process, i.e. the
step 1 and step 2 indicators set out in this document will not be applied on those ICT TPPs.
30. Furthermore, the ESAs propose the list of designated CTPPs to be stable, to the extent
possible, over time in order to manage threshold effects15. This was also supported by the
market participants during the public consultation. While the Discussion Paper proposed the
application of a certain threshold for the Lead Overseer to consider proceeding to a roll off
phase of the CTPP from the list of CTPPs, mixed views were expressed during the public
consultation. To this end, the ESAs propose to perform a holistic assessment in case a CTPP
does not meet the minimum thresholds for a consecutive number of years and to decide
accordingly a potential exit from the list of CTPPs, in consultation with the Oversight Forum,
also taking into account the status of pending recommendations addressed to that CTPP. It
should be also noted that planned or undertaken events impacting the CTPPs (e.g. mergers,
13 As per Article 4(1)(b) of the consultation paper on the ITS on the register of information, the register of information includes
information on all the material subcontractors when an ICT service provided by a direct ICT TPP is supporting a critical or
important function of the financial entities.
14 See the footnote in the section “Background and rationale”.
15 Threshold effects in this context are understood as cases in which an ICT TPP is at the border of being considered as critical.
For example, it should be avoided that an ICT TPP is considered as critical in year n, as non-critical in year n+1, but then again
critical in year n+2. It is considered important for both the ICT TPP as well as the supervisory authorities to have some
continuity in the list of CTPPs over time.
13
divestments etc.) would be reflected in the annual update of the list of CTPPs as per Article
31(9) of the DORA.
31. The ESAs have also explored the possiblity of taking into account the list of essential or
important entities under NIS216 and CER17 to the extent that certain ICT TPPs have been
designated as ‘essential or important entities’ at national level. However, given the horizontal
nature of those directives, the wider scope of the DORA when it comes to the financial sector,
as well as in line with feedback received from the market participants, the ESAs propose not
to consider this element for the purpose of the DORA criticiality assessment.
32. It is also essential to note that the assessment of the proposed indicators is subject to the
availability of data as these have been identified per each indicator. In case of inadequate,
insufficient, timely unavailable or incomplete data and as also recommended by the market
participants during the public consultation, the ESAs propose , to the extent possible, to rely
on existing available data or seek industry input, and to apply expert judgement in order to
meet their obligation as per Article 31 of the DORA. Having said that, and given the high
dependency of the proposed set of indicators on the registers of information (the primary data
source to perform the criticality assessment), in case the Delegated Act will specify the type
and source of data to be used by the ESAs for the criticality assessment, the ESAs propose the
Commission enables the ESAs to also use alternative data sources for the performance of
the criticality assessment as a complementary source of information and to mitigate cases
where render the use of registers of information may not be possible. This can reduce potential
disruptions in the performance of the criticality assessment that may arise in particular during
the first years of application of the registers of information and facilitate timely conduct of the
oversight cycle.
33. Without prejudice to paragraph 32, the ESAs propose the set of indicators as proposed in this
document should also be used for the assessment of the opt-in requests according to Article
31(11) of the DORA.
16 Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on measures for a high
common level of cybersecurity across the Union, amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972, and
repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS 2 Directive) (Text with EEA relevance): EUR-Lex - 32022L2555 - EN - EUR-Lex
(europa.eu).
17 Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on the resilience of critical
entities and repealing Council Directive 2008/114/EC (Text with EEA relevance): EUR-Lex - 32022L2557 - EN - EUR-Lex
(europa.eu).
14
Criterion 1: impact on provision of financial services
Criterion 1:
“The systemic impact on the stability, continuity, or quality of the provision of financial services in
the event that an ICT TPP would face a large-scale operational failure to provide its services, taking
into account the number of financial entities and the total value of assets of financial entities to which
the ICT TPP provides services.”
Introduction
34. If an ICT TPP fails or is no longer able to provide its services, including in the case of severe
business disruption caused by external events, this may cause systemic risks to the financial
markets, which can have a negative impact on the stability, continuity, and quality of the
provision of financial services.
35. This is particularly relevant for such market segments, which are dominated by a small number
of highly dominant service providers. In particular, if the ICT services provided are highly
standardised, allowing the respective ICT TPPs to provide their services to a large number of
different clients in an automated manner.
36. For this reason, it is of paramount importance to have a clear view on the extent and nature
of impact which a large-scale operational failure of an ICT TPP would have on financial entities,
which rely on services provided by an ICT TPP, and on the financial system. This should not
only consider the total number of financial entities, which use services provided by an ICT TPP,
but also the size of the respective financial entities, their systemic importance and
interconnectedness, as well as the importance of the services provided by an ICT TPP on
financial entities’ provision of financial services taking into account stability, continuity as well
as quality considerations.
37. It should be further noted that in their feedback to the public consultation, market participants
noted the importance of considering the criticality of the functions supported by the ICT TPPs,
which is highly relevant both in the case of a large-scale operational failure and the provision
of such ICT services by the same ICT TPP.
38. These aspects are addressed by criterion 1 and 3 as set out by Article 31(2)(a) and (c) of the
DORA and further specified in the below list of indicators.
15
List of step 1 indicators
Indicator 1.1 Number of financial entities directly or indirectly relying on ICT services
provided by the same ICT TPP where these support critical or important
functions (per type of financial entity and in percentage terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture ICT TPPs’ pan-European footprint by
assessing how many financial entities rely on ICT services provided by the same ICT TPPs.
The idea is that the more financial entities rely on ICT services provided by the same ICT
TPP where these support critical or important functions, the higher the impact on the
stability, continuity, or quality of the provision of financial services in the event that the
ICT TPP would face a large-scale operational failure to provide its services.
- This indicator aims to cover both criteria 1 and 3 (as per Article 31(2)(a) and (c) of the
DORA) given the overlap on criticality of the functions supported by an ICT TPP. This is
supported by the feedback from the public consultation to put more emphasis on ICT
services supporting critical or important functions of financial entities and also to keep
the indicators simple and avoid overlaps.
- For each ICT TPP, the result of this indicator is calculated by dividing the number of
financial entities relying on ICT services of this ICT TPP that support critical or important
functions by the total number of EU financial entities falling under the scope of the DORA
(also per type of financial entity).
- Critical or important functions are identified by financial entities under the scope of the
DORA in the registers of information.18
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information19. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
- As noted during the public consultation, this indicator should be considered in
conjunction with the other indicators while leveraging on existing available data.
- In relation to the minimum relevance threshold, it is noted that feedback from the public
consultation was that the proposed 10% is rather low. Nevertheless, no relevant data
was provided to support a higher threshold. The magnitude of excess of this threshold
would be considered during the assessment to ensure the appropriate coverage of
potentially ‘critical’ characterisitcs.
Minimum - 10% or more of total number of financial entities in the EU (total and/or
relevance per type of financial entity)20.
threshold
18 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
19 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
20 The minimum relevance threshold for this indicator is met if for at least one type of financial entity 10% or more of the
total number of financial entities of the same type use ICT services of the same ICT TPP or if 10% or more of the total number
of financial entities use ICT services of the same ICT TPP.
16
Key data • Registers of Information
sources21 • Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
Indicator 1.2 Share of financial entities directly or indirectly relying on ICT services
provided by the same ICT TPP where these support critical or important
functions, measured by the total value of assets of financial entities or an
equivalent metric (per type of financial entity and in percentage terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture ICT TPPs’ pan-European footprint by
assessing the share of financial entities relying on ICT services provided by the same ICT
TPP. The idea is that the higher the share of financial entities relying on ICT services
provided by the same ICT TPP where these support critical or important functions (in
terms of total value of assets or an equivalent metric), the higher the ICT TPP’s level of
criticality for the EU financial sector.
- This indicator aims to cover both criteria 1 and 3 (as per Article 31(2)(a) and (c) of the
DORA) given the overlap on criticality of the functions supported by an ICT TPP. This is
supported by the feedback from the public consultation, to put more emphasis on ICT
services supporting critical or important functions of financial entities and also to keep
the indicators simple with no overlaps.
- For each ICT TPP, the result of this indicator is calculated by dividing the total value of
assets/equivalent metric of financial entities relying on ICT services of this ICT TPP that
support critical or important functions by the total value of assets/equivalent metric of
all EU financial entities falling under the scope of the DORA (per type of financial entity).
- The reference to the ‘total value of assets’ is referred to in Article 31(2)(a) of the DORA.
However, this metric might not be representative for all types of financial entities
subject to the DORA to measure their systemic impact on the stability, continuity, or
quality of the provision of the financial services they provide. Hence, from that point of
view, it is proposed to take into account an equivalent metric for financial entities for
which the ‘total value of assets’ is not considered representative e.g. ‘assets under
management’ or ‘premiums collected’. For this reason, it is considered important to
define for each type of financial entity covered by the DORA the most relevant
underlying basis. Please see Annex V of the Consultation Paper on Draft Implementing
Technical Standards to establish the templates composing the register of information in
relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT TPPs
as mandated by the DORA.22
21 The key data sources make reference to the Consultation Paper on Draft Implementing Technical Standards to establish
the templates composing the register of information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services
provided by ICT TPPs as mandated by the DORA: https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/4.%20CP%20-
%20Draft%20ITS%20on%20register%20of%20information.pdf. Please note that the final list of key data sources will depend
on the final version of the ITS, as adopted by the Commission.
22 Consultation Paper on Draft Implementing Technical Standards to establish the templates composing the register of
information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT TPPs:
https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/4.%20CP%20-
17
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information23. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
- As noted during the public consultation, this indicator should be considered in
conjunction with the other indicators while leveraging on existing available data.
- In relation to the minimum relevance threshold, it is noted that feedback from the public
consultation was that the proposed 10% is rather low. Nevertheless, no relevant data
was provided to support a higher threshold. The magnitude of excess of this threshold
would be considered during the assessment to ensure the appropriate coverage of
potentially ‘critical’ characterisitcs.
Minimum - 10% or more of total value of assets/equivalent metric of financial
relevance entities in the EU (per type of financial entity)24.
threshold
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
List of step 2 indicators
Indicator 1.3 Share of financial entities for which the impact of discontinuing the ICT
services provided by the same ICT TPP would be assessed as ‘high’ on the
activities and operations of those financial entities (per type of financial
entity and in percentage terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture the impact of a discontinuation of ICT
services provided by the same ICT TPP on financial entities. The idea is that the higher
the share of financial entities that are highly impacted by a discontinuation of ICT
services provided by the same ICT TPP, the higher the respective ICT TPP’s level of
criticality for the EU financial sector. This will be mainly based on the financial entity’s
assessment.
- For each ICT TPP, the result of this indicator is calculated by dividing the total value of
assets/equivalent metric of financial entities reporting that the discontinuation of ICT
services provided by the same ICT TPP have a high impact on their activities and
operations by the total value of assets/equivalent metric of all EU financial entities
falling under the scope of the DORA (per type of financial entity).This includes material
subcontractors as reported in the registers of information25. In particular, if
%20Draft%20ITS%20on%20register%20of%20information.pdf. Please note that this list is subject to the final version of the
ITS, as adopted by the Commission.
23 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
24 The minimum relevance threshold for this indicator is met if for at least one type of financial entity 10% or more of the
total value of assets / total assets-equivalent of financial entities of the same type use ICT services of the same ICT TPP or if
10% or more of the total value of assets / total assets-equivalent of financial entities use ICT services of the same ICT TPP.
25 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
18
subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation to the ICT
services provided by the group as a whole.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • Other information available to the ESAs (e.g. findings from supervisory
activities)
Indicator 1.4 Number of designated CTPPs relying on the same subcontractors to directly
or indirectly provide ICT services to financial entities supporting critical or
important functions (in absolute terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to identify the critical subcontractors in the EU financial
system. The idea is that the more CTPPs rely on the same subcontractors to provide ICT
services to financial entities supporting critical or important functions, the more
important those subcontractors are for the EU financial sector and might have to be
designated as a CTPP themselves.
- It should be noted that in scope of this indicator are not only rank 1 providers, but all
providers in the subcontracting chain. Focus should be on subcontractors of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions or material parts thereof (‘material
subcontractors’). To acquire a clear and precise overview of ICT service supply chains, a
reporting template on subcontracting arrangements by the CTPPs (see Article 41(1)(b)
of the DORA) as well as complementary information through the registers of information
are expected to be taken into account.26
- The application of this indicator is likely to be challenging at the start of the designation
exercise due to limited availability of relevant data. This implies that this indicator can
only be applied after some first experiences with designated CTPPs, i.e., it will not be
used for the designation of the first group of CTPPs.
- Indicators listed below for criterion 4 will be used on a complementary basis to inform
this indicator.
Key data • Reporting template for CTPPs to provide information on their
sources subscontracting arrangements
• Registers of Information
26 In line with the purpose of the ITS on the register of information as set out in the respective Consultation Paper, the
templates included in the draft ITS aim to capture the ICT service supply chain with a focus on subcontractors of ICT services
supporting critical or important functions or material parts thereof (‘material subcontractors’):
https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/4.%20CP%20-
%20Draft%20ITS%20on%20register%20of%20information.pdf. Please note that this wording is subject to the final version of
the ITS, as adopted by the Commission.
19
Criterion 2: importance of financial entities
Criterion 2:
“The systemic character or importance of the financial entities that rely on the relevant ICT third-
party service provider, assessed in accordance with the following parameters:
i. the number of global systemically important institutions (G-SIIs) or other systemically
important institutions (O-SIIs) that rely on the respective ICT third-party service provider;
ii. the interdependence between the G-SIIs or O-SIIs referred to in point (i) and other financial
entities, including situations where the G-SIIs or O-SIIs provide financial infrastructure services
to other financial entities.”
Introduction
39. As recent financial crises have revealed, financial entities could either be “too big to fail” or
“too interconnected to fail”.
40. Various international organisations have developed standards to address this shortcoming,
such as the G20, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), the International Organization of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO), or the Financial Stability Board (FSB).
41. Financial entities have been characterised as systemically important if their distress or
disorderly failure is likely to cause significant disruption to the financial system and economic
activity due to their size, complexity and systemic interconnectedness. A failure of such
systemically important financial entities could seriously damage the stability of the financial
system due to spillover effects to other financial entities and to private and institutional
investors. The negative externalities of a failure of a systemically important financial entity
would also inflict damage on the real economy through multiple channels.
42. Criterion 2 of Article 31(2)(b) of the DORA takes this consideration into account by referring to
the systemic character or importance of the financial entities that rely on ICT services provided
by an ICT TPP and by making specific reference to financial entities being designated as G-SIIs
and O-SIIs.
List of step 1 indicators
Indicator 2.1 Number of G-SIIs and O-SIIs (credit institutions only) directly or indirectly
relying on ICT services provided by the same ICT TPP where these support
critical or important functions (in absolute terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture ICT TPPs’ pan-European footprint by
assessing the number of G-SIIs and O-SIIs (credit institutions only) receiving ICT services
provided by the same ICT TPPs. The idea is that the more financial entities classified as
G-SIIs and O-SIIs rely on ICT services provided by the same ICT TPP, where these support
20
critical or important functions, the higher the ICT TPP’s level of criticality for the EU
financial sector.
- It should be noted that the lists of G-SIIs27/O-SIIs28 on which this indicator would rely
refer to credit institutions, thus not covering all the financial entities falling under the
scope of the DORA.
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information29. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
Minimum - At least 1 G-SII; OR
relevance - at least 3 O-SIIs; OR
threshold - at least 1 O-SII with an O-SII score above 3,00030.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • List of Globally Systemically Important Institutions (G-SIIs)
• List of Other Systemically Important Institutions, including scores (O-
SIIs)
• Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
Indicator 2.2 Number of financial entities, identified as systemic by competent
authorities, other than G-SIIs and O-SIIs (other than credit institutions),
directly or indirectly relying on ICT services provided by the same ICT TPP
where these support critical or important functions (in absolute terms)
Notes:
- The text in Article 31(2)(b) of the DORA for criterion 2 refers to G-SIIs and O-SIIs for
which a respective publicly available list applies only to credit institutions. Therefore,
indicator 2.2 aims at capturing the reliance of other types of financial entities, which
are ‘systemic’ and not included in a publicly available list of credit institutions identified
as G-SIIs or O-SIIs, considered as other types of G-SIIs/O-SIIs for the purpose of this
indicator.
- The objective of indicator 2.2 is to capture ICT TPPs' pan-European footprint by
assessing the number of systemic financial entities relying on ICT services provided by
the same ICT TPP. The idea is that the more financial entities identified as ‘systemic’
rely on ICT services provided by the same ICT TPP where these support critical or
important functions, the higher the ICT TPP’s level of criticality for the EU financial
sector.
- Indicator 2.2 refers to ‘financial entities identified as systemic’ based on supervisory
expert judgment. This does not imply ‘publicly identified’ or proposing the
27 Global Systemically Important Institutions: https://www.eba.europa.eu/risk-analysis-and-data/global-systemically-
important-institutions.
28 Other Systemically Important Institutions: https://www.eba.europa.eu/risk-analysis-and-data/other-systemically-
important-institutions-o-siis-.
29 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
30 Institutions are given a score from 0 to 10,000 bps representing their systemic riskiness.
21
establishment of lists of systemically important financial entities (like e.g., list of G-SIIs)
or developing a methodology on how such an assessment should be performed.
Relevant competent authorities would be best placed to provide such indications based
on expert judgement which would be performed only for the purposes of this process.
The DORA already gives a hint on such aspect in Recital (56), which states that some
financial entities play “a systemic role” (for example, payments, banking, and clearing
and settlement) while “other subsectors” can be considered less systemically important
(for example, small asset managers and credit rating agencies).
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information31. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
Minimum - At least 1 Financial Market Infrastructure (DORA Article 2(1)(g), (h), (i)
relevance and (j)) identified as ’systemic’ by competent authorities; OR
threshold - At least 3 financial entities (other than credit institutions and FMIs)
identified as ’systemic’ by competent authorities.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • ‘Systemic’ financial entities per Member State as identified by the CAs
• Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
• Other information available to the ESAs32
List of step 2 indicators
Indicator 2.3 Level of interdependence between G-SIIs or O-SIIs and other financial
entities, including where G-SIIs or O-SIIs provide financial infrastructure
services to other financial entities, relying on ICT services provided by the
same ICT TPP
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture interconnectedness within the EU financial
sector, and subsequently identify altogether the ‘interconnected’ financial entities that
rely on ICT services from the same ICT TPP. The idea is that the stronger the
interdependencies are between systemic financial entities relying on ICT services
provided by the same ICT TPP and other financial entities, the higher the ICT TPP’s level
of criticality for the EU financial sector.
- Article 31(2)(b)(ii) of the DORA specifically refers to the “interdependence between G-
SIIs/O-SIIs and other financial entities”. However, as also revealed via the public
consultation, it is highly challenging and complicated to obtain concrete and
representative data to measure this appropriately covering the EU financial sector.
- While this criterion appeared to primarily assess the degree of technological
interdependence between G-SIIs/O-SIIs and financial entities, it is concluded this is
31 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
32 Such other information could be the list of financial entities required to perform TLPT (Article 26(8) of the DORA) taking
into account the criteria set out in Article 4(2) of the DORA.
22
highly complex/difficult from a technical/operational exposure point of view due to
unavailable concrete and representative data.
To overcome this issue, the ESAs have put significant efforts into identifying an
alternative approach and to measure/assess this criterion using as a proxy the potential
financial interdependence among the finance sector, leveraging on existing available
data such as COREP data (large exposures and concentration of funding both intra- and
cross-sectoral), resolution data (intermediaries of Financial Market Infrastructures)
reinsurance data or EMIR data. However, it is concluded the available data is not
sufficiently representative and hence not suited as basis for the assessment of
interdependencies between G-SIIs and O-SIIs and other financial entities. Moreover,
large parts of the available financial data that could be used as a proxy would not capture
interdependencies with all the financial sector. Acknowledging the data limitations in
terms of completeness, comprehensiveness, availability and representativeness, this
indicator will be considered, to the extent possible, in the holistic/comprehensive
assessment. This could be further analysed in the context of the relevant methodology.
Key data • Other information available to the ESAs (e.g. findings from supervisory
sources activities)
23
Criterion 3: critical or important functions
Criterion 3:
“The reliance of financial entities on the services provided by the relevant ICT third-party service
provider in relation to critical or important functions of financial entities that ultimately involve the
same ICT third-party service provider, irrespective of whether financial entities rely on those services
directly or indirectly, through subcontracting arrangements.”
Introduction
43. Relying on ICT services provided by ICT TPPs to perform critical or important functions creates
specific risks for financial entities and should be subject to appropriate oversight. It can have
a strong impact on financial entities’ risk profiles.
44. Article 3(22) of the DORA defines a ‘critical or important function’ as a function, the disruption
of which would materially impair the financial performance of a financial entity, or the
soundness or continuity of its services and activities, or the discontinued, defective or failed
performance of that function would materially impair the continuing compliance of a financial
entity with the conditions and obligations of its authorisation, or with its other obligations
under applicable financial services law.
45. As stated in recital 70 of the DORA, the definition of ‘critical or important function’ under DORA
encompasses the ‘critical functions’ as defined in Article 2(1), point (35) of the Bank Recovery
and Resolution Directive33.
46. Reference to ‘critical or important functions’ is also made in the criteria for designation of
CTPPs. Article 31(2)(c) of the DORA states that a designation shall be based, amongst others,
on the level of financial entities’ reliance on services provided by an ICT TPP in relation to
critical or important functions of those financial entities that involve the same ICT TPP. In this
respect it must not make a difference whether financial entities directly or indirectly (via
subcontracting arrangements) rely on these services provided by an ICT TPP.
List of step 1 indicators
47. The extent to which an ICT service provided by an ICT TPP supports critical or important
functions at the level of the financial entity is considered a vital element of the criticality
assessment in general and can be considered a starting point of this exercise. Due to the
proposed holistic nature of the criticality assessment and as also recommended by the market
participants during the public consultation, it is proposed to integrate this important
dimension of criticality in all step 1 indicators and not have distinct indicators on ‘critical or
important functions’ under criterion 3. Instead, criterion 3 is composed of just one step 2
33 Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the
recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and
Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and
Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council Text with EEA
relevance: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014L0059.
24
indicator, which is focused on the level of criticality of the ICT services themselves that are
provided by ICT TPPs to their financial entity clients under the scope of the DORA.
List of step 2 indicator
Indicator Level of inherent criticality of ICT services directly or indirectly provided to
3.1 financial entities by the same ICT TPP
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture the inherent criticality of ICT services
provided to financial entities by the same ICT TPP. This is considered an important piece
of information to further assess an ICT TPP’s level of criticality for the EU financial sector.
- This indicator could build up on a list of different types of ICT services provided to EU
financial entities as defined in Annex IV of the Consultation Paper on Draft ITS on the
register of information34, assessing the inherent criticality these ICT services may entail.
Such assessment is not planned to be disclosed. It is clarified that this indicator will be
agnostic to the functions these ICT services support i.e. the inherent criticality of ICT
services will not take into account the type of financial entities’ functions supported by
these ICT services.
- This includes ICT services provided by material subcontractors as reported in the
registers of information35. In particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the
indicator will be assessed in relation to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • Expert judgement
• Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
• Other information available to the ESAs
34 The Consultation Paper on Draft Implementing Technical Standards to establish the templates composing the register of
information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT TPPs as mandated by the
DORA (https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/4.%20CP%20-
%20Draft%20ITS%20on%20register%20of%20information.pdf) includes a list of ICT services (see Annex IV). Please note that
this list may be subject to change and will depend on the final version of the ITS, as adopted by the Commission.
35 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
25
Criterion 4: degree of substitutability
Criterion 4:
“The degree of substitutability of the ICT third-party service provider, taking into account the
following parameters:
i. the lack of real alternatives, even partial, due to the limited number of ICT TPPs active on a
specific market, or the market share of the relevant ICT TPPs, or the technical complexity or
sophistication involved, including in relation to any proprietary technology, or the specific
features of the ICT TPP’s organisation or activity;
ii. difficulties in relation to partially or fully migrating the relevant data and workloads from the
relevant ICT TPP to another ICT TPP, due either to significant financial costs, time or other
resources that the migration process may entail, or to increased ICT risk or other operational
risks to which the financial entity may be exposed through such migration.”
Introduction
48. Systemic risk can materialise if a sufficiently large number of financial entities (or a single
systemically important financial entity) is dependent on one or a small number of ICT TPPs for
the provision of critical ICT services that are impossible or very difficult to substitute in a cost-
efficient and quality manner and in an appropriate timeframe, for instance due to limitations
in the capacity or ability of alternative ICT TPPs or other solutions.
49. A major disruption, outage, or failure at one of these ICT TPPs could create a single point of
failure with potential adverse consequences for financial stability and/or the safety and
soundness of multiple financial entities.
50. The ultimate impact would depend on the specific ICT services being provided, the criticality
and substitutability of those services, and the mitigation plans in place by financial entities and
the ICT TPPs in question.
51. Criterion 4 of Article 31(2)(d) of the DORA takes account of this reasoning as it refers to the
“degree of substitutability of the ICT third-party service provider”, the “lack of real
alternatives” as well as the “difficulties in relation to […] migrating the relevant data and
workloads from the relevant ICT third- party service provider to another ICT third-party service
provider”.
List of step 1 indicators
Indicator 4.1 Share of financial entities reporting that no alternative ICT TPPs are
available or have the required ability and/or capacity to (fully or partially)
provide the same ICT services supporting critical or important functions as
directly or indirectly provided by the existing ICT TPP, measured by the total
number of financial entities (total) and by the total value of assets of
26
financial entities or an equivalent metric36 (per type of financial entity and
in percentage terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture the level of substitutability of an ICT TPP. The
idea is that the more difficult it is to substitute an ICT TPP, the higher the ICT TPP’s level
of criticality for the EU financial sector.
- Substitutability is not only understood as the availability of alternative providers, but
also takes into account the ability and/or capacity of alternative providers to perform
the same ICT services as the original ICT TPP.
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information37. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
Minimum - 10% or more of total value of assets/equivalent metric per type of
relevance financial entity in the EU; OR
threshold - 10% or more of total number of financial entities in the EU.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
• Other information available to the ESAs
Indicator 4.2 Share of financial entities reporting that it is highly complex/difficult to
migrate or reintegrate ICT services directly or indirectly provided by an ICT
TPP to support critical or important functions, measured by the total
number of financial entities (total) and by the total value of assets38 of
financial entities (per type of financial entity and in percentage terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture the level of difficulty of migrating or
reintegrating ICT services provided by an ICT TPP. The idea is that the more difficult it is
to migrate or reintegrate ICT services, the higher the ICT TPP’s level of criticality for the
EU financial sector.
36 The reference to the ‘total value of assets’ is referred to in DORA Article 31(2)(a). However, this metric might not be
representative for all types of financial entities subject to DORA to measure their systemic impact on the stability, continuity,
or quality of the provision of the financial services they provide. Hence, from that point of view, it is proposed to take into
account an equivalent metric to represent all the financial entities e.g. ‘assets under management’ or ‘premiums collected’.
For this reason, it is considered important to define for each type of financial entity covered by DORA the most useful
underlying basis.
37 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
38 The reference to the ‘total value of assets’ is referred to in DORA Article 31(2)(a). However, this metric might not be
representative for all types of financial entities subject to DORA to measure their systemic impact on the stability, continuity,
or quality of the provision of the financial services they provide. Hence, from that point of view, it is proposed to take into
account an equivalent metric to represent all the financial entities e.g. ‘assets under management’ or ‘premiums collected’.
For this reason, it is considered important to define for each type of financial entity covered by DORA the most useful
underlying basis.
27
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information39. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
Minimum - 10% or more of total value of assets/equivalent metric of financial
relevance entities in the EU; OR
threshold - 10% or more of total number of financial entities in the EU.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • Publicly available data (e.g. LEI database)
• Other information available to the ESAs
List of step 2 indicators
Indicator 4.3 Market share of ICT TPPs directly or indirectly providing ICT services to
financial entities (measured by the total number of financial entities and if
available, by the annual expenses or estimated costs/budget of the
contractual arrangements40 (per type of ICT service and in percentage
terms)
Notes:
- The objective of this indicator is to capture ICT TPPs’ pan-European footprint per type of
ICT service41 by assessing the market shares of ICT TPPs. The idea is that the higher the
market share of an ICT TPP (per type of ICT service), the higher the potential dependency
to the respective ICT TPP.
- For each ICT TPP, the result of this indicator is calculated by dividing the total number of
financial entities relying on ICT services provided by the same ICT TPP by the total
number of EU financial entities relying on ICT services of ICT TPPs (per type of ICT
service). This can be also assessed by dividing – per type of ICT service - the total annual
expenses or estimated costs/budget of all contractual arrangements, which an ICT TPP
has in place with EU financial entities falling under the scope of the DORA, by the total
annual expenses or estimated costs/budget of all contractual arrangements, which all
ICT TPPs have in place for the same type of ICT service. It is acknowledged that the use
of annual expenses/estimate costs as a basis to assess TPPs’ market share will be subject
to sufficient, complete and consistent data from the financial entities.
- This indicator also captures ‘market density’ which refers to the concentration of ICT
service providers within a specific market area (number of competitors). It provides
insights into the level of competition and the saturation of providers offering the same
ICT services. Higher market density indicates a larger number of ICT TPPs providing the
same ICT services.
39 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
40 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
41 The Consultation Paper on Draft Implementing Technical Standards to establish the templates composing the register of
information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT TPPs as mandated by the
DORA (https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/system/files/2023-06/4.%20CP%20-
%20Draft%20ITS%20on%20register%20of%20information.pdf) includes a list of ICT services (see Annex IV). Please note that
this list may be subject to change and will depend on the final version of the ITS, as adopted by the Commission.
28
- This includes material subcontractors as reported in the registers of information42. In
particular, if subcontractors belong to a group, the indicator will be assessed in relation
to the ICT services provided by the group as a whole.
Key data • Registers of Information
sources • Other information available to the ESAs
42 Subject to the final ITS on the register of information under Article 28(9) of the DORA and the availability of relevant data.
29
Joint advice on oversight fees
Introduction
52. Once designated as critical, TPPs will have to pay oversight fees to their Lead Overseer to cover
the costs related to the oversight tasks. Neither the amount of these fees nor the way the
CTPPs will have to pay them are defined at Level 1. However the aim of such fees is specified
in Article 43 of the DORA.
53. Indeed, such fees will be the single way to fund the oversight activities of the ESAs, given that
pursuant to Article 43(1) of the DORA the fees charged to designated CTPPs shall “fully cover
the Lead Overseer’s necessary expenditure in relation to the conduct of oversight tasks
pursuant to this Regulation including the reimbursement of any costs which may be incurred
as a result of work carried out by the JET”. Article 43(1) second subparagraph of the DORA
further requires that the amount of fees charged to CTPPs “shall cover all costs derived from
the execution of the duties” under the DORA.
54. Recital (96) of the DORA also explains that fees will be charged to fully fund oversight activities,
but not to cover ESA’s “costs for the implementation of dedicated ICT systems supporting the
upcoming oversight, since dedicated ICT systems would need to be developed and deployed
beforehand” (funded from Union and national competent authorities’ contributions)
consistently with the Legislative Financial Statement (LFS) on the DORA. The ESAs’ technical
advice is thus consistent with this clear delimitation of fees to be levied upon CTPPs. However,
it is also important to highlight that the identified overall amount of incurred expenditure in
the LFS cannot be considered as comprehensive, given the number of elements that cannot be
anticipated in the short term and which may impact the expenditure of the Lead Overseers
(the number of designated CTPPs, the intensity, frequency and nature of oversight activities,
the involvement of competent authorities, the use of independent experts, etc.). Hence, it is
of the highest importance for the ESAs and involved competent authorities in the JETs to have
the necessary flexibility to estimate their incurred expenditure, including the possibility to
reassess the fees which need to be levied upon CTPPs to cover the oversight tasks under the
DORA from one year to another. The functioning of the future Oversight framework will
particularly rely on the means the involved authorities will have to perform the different
oversight activities foreseen by the DORA.
55. During the public consultation, market participants invited the ESAs to clarify how the CTPPs
will be informed of the calculation of their respective share of the oversight fees. In line with
the applicable financial rules, the total overall aggregated amount of the yearly oversight fees
charged from CTPPs will be published in the EU Official Journal and on the websites of the ESAs
by the end of Q1 each year. When providing the debit note to the CTPPs, such total overall
aggregated amount of the yearly oversight fees will be provided by the Lead Overseer to each
CTPP, but it will not provide individual information about the applicable turnover of the other
CTPPs.
30
56. While preparing this technical advice, the ESAs faced several challenges. The main one is the
lack of actual information on the future CTPPs (number, size, group structure, etc), given that
their designation will take place after the publication of the related delegated act. The ability
of the ESAs to anticipate which TPPs will be designated as critical is limited as the criticality
criteria are yet to be determined. Therefore, the ESAs are of the opinion that the method of
calculation of the oversight fees should be adaptable to the annual designation process of
CTPPs, while being proportionate to the turnover of the future CTPPs, in line with Article 43(1)
of the DORA. Consistently with the specification of the request of the Commission, the method
proposed by the ESAs is inspired by the experience of national supervisors and ESMA when
setting supervisory fees for financial institutions.
57. During the public consultation, the ESAs have taken the opportunity to seek feedback from
relevant stakeholders on ICT services, in particular on the relevant information that should be
taken into account to define the scope of the applicable turnover that will be used to calculate
the oversight fees.
58. Moreover, the ESAs also considered the fact that some CTPPs might be designated on the basis
of opt-in voluntary requests based on Article 31(11) of the DORA. The tasks related to the
assessment of such applications cannot be funded by the oversight fees paid by other
designated CTPPs. Hence, the ESAs have taken the opportunity of the public consultation to
seek feedback from relevant stakeholders on the best way to fund such tasks.
59. Lastly, the ESAs were also invited to reflect on the frequency of reviewing the respective
delegated acts to reflect related developments. In this regard, it is considered appropriate to
ensure consistency with the review clause in the DORA Article 58 and hence to perform a
review on the need for potential amendments in the respective delegated acts every 3 years.
This could faciliate adequate planning and stability in the calculation, charge and collection of
oversight fees.
31
Scope of the oversight fees: estimated expenditure and applicable
turnover
Scope of the estimated oversight expenditure
60. The specific rules on fees which are set out in sectoral (L1) legislation, as well as in relevant
delegated (Level 2) acts 43 rely on the principle of full-cost recovery, which establishes that the
fees should cover:
the total estimate of all direct and indirect expenditure necessary for the targeted/defined
o
tasks performed by ESAs (so staff resources directly involved in the defined tasks, but also
the costs of the horizontal services i.e., operational and administrative support necessary
for fulfilling defined tasks);
the total estimate of direct and indirect expenditure for the reimbursement of competent
o
authorities involving staff and operational resources to provide assistance to ESAs.
61. For instance, for financial entities under its direct supervision, ESMA uses the Activity Based
Management (ABM) model based on an activity breakdown allowing to identify the main
expenditures categories: i.e. (i) direct activities (ii) horizontal services supporting the execution
of the direct activities.
62. Based on the LFS of the DORA, oversight expenditure will cover staff expenditure,
infrastructure and operating expenditure. Based on the assumption of an equal sharing of the
overall expenditures among the three ESAs and on current understanding of implementation
timelines, each of the ESAs is estimated to incur at least €693,000 for the first year (i.e., 2025),
€2,553,000 for 2026 and €2,683,000 in 2027.
63. The ESAs are of the view that such estimated costs in the LFS are underestimated given that
they do not cover all identified oversight tasks. There is for instance no reference to additional
costs generated by the use of independent experts, or by the involvement of the competent
authorities. In addition, such assessment is subject to the effective start of the oversight
activities.
Hence, the ESAs propose the Delegated Act to clarify that the related expenditure of at least the following
oversight activities identified in the DORA Level 1 will be funded by the oversight fees:
43 Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/805 specifying fees applicable to the supervision by ESMA of certain benchmark
administrators (OJ L 145, 24.5.2O22, p. 14) ; Delegated regulation (EU) 2020/1302 with regard to fees charged by ESMA to
central counterparties established in third countries (OJ L 305, 32.9.2020, p.1) ; Delegated regulation (EU) 272/2012 with
regard to fees charged by ESMA to credit rating agencies (OJ L 90, 28.3.2012, p. 6) ; Delegated regulation (EU) 2022/930
specifying fees relating to the supervision by ESMA of data reporting service providers (OJ L 162, 17.6.2022, p. 1) ; Delegated
regulation (EU) 2019/360 with regard to fees charged by ESMA to trade repositories (OJ L 81, 22.3.2019, p. 58) ; Delegated
regulation (EU) 1003/2013 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 with regard to fees charged by the ESMA to trade
repositories (OJ L 279, 19.10.2013, p. 4) ; Delegated regulation (EU) 2020/1732 with regard to fees charged by ESMA to
securitisation repositories (OJ L 390, 20.11.2020, p. 1).
32
• Expenditures related to the designation of the CTPPs (including the appointment of the relevant Lead
Overseer);
• Expenditures related to the conduct of the oversight;
• Expenditures related to the follow-up of the recommendations issued by the Lead Overseers;
• Expenditures related to the governance of the Oversight.
The Delegated Act should also specify that the expenditures related to the activities performed by the CAs to
participate to the oversight of CTPPs are also part of the oversight expenditures.
In addition, it should specify such expenditures will cover both direct and indirect costs related to oversight
activities.
In order to clarify this proposal, for each category, illustrative examples are provided below based on what
the ESAs can identify at this early stage of the process. However, the ESAs do not advocate for such a level of
detail in the Delegated Act. Indeed, this list is not exhaustive, and does not prevent the inclusion of any other
expenditure to the extent it falls under the remit of oversight activities.
(i) Designation of CTPPs, such as the expenditure related to the treatment and assessment of the
collected data and the designation (through the JC upon Oversight Forum (OF)44
recommendation) of the CTPPs45, or to the appointment of the respective Lead Overseer (LO),
based on Article 31(1) of the DORA.
While performed by the ESAs and not by the Lead Overseers stricto sensu, these assessments are the starting
points for the oversight mechanism to apply. From that point of view, such activities, which are based on
article 31 of the DORA, are considered as costs which derive from the execution of the duties set out in section
II of Chapter V of the DORA, referred to in article 43 of the DORA. Furthermore, the principle of full cost
recovery implies that the related costs should be covered in full by a fee levied upon on the designated CTPPs.
Therefore, the ESAs are of the opinion that this assessment should be covered by the oversight fees paid by
CTPPs.
(ii) Conduct of the oversight, such as the expenditure related to the organization, coordination and
performance of on-site inspections, general investigations and other off-site activities (e.g.
preparation of related decisions and exchanges with CTPPs), or the advice provided by the
independent experts in relation to matters falling under the remit of direct oversight activities.
Such expenditures are expected to represent the biggest share of the overall oversight expenditures.
(iii) Follow-up of the recommendations issued by the LO, such as expenditure related to the
treatment of the notifications of the CTPPs of their intention to follow the recommendations,
and the communication with the relevant competent authorities.
(iv) Governance of the Oversight, such as the expenditure related to the functioning of the JON for
coordination among Lead Overseers in the preparatory stages and the conduct of oversight.
44 The Oversight Forum will be in charge of promoting a consistent approach for the monitoring of ICT third party risk and
assessing the results of oversight activities. It will be composed by the ESAs, NCAs, relevant additional authorities, NIS
authorities, ECB, ESRB, ENISA and COM.
45 The list of CTPPs shall be yearly updated by the ESAs through the Joint Committee
33
Definition of the applicable turnover of the CTPPs
64. To determine the appropriate method, basis and available information for considering the
“applicable turnover” of the CTPP in fee calculations, the ESAs have identified five issues to
solve: (i) the data available, and the timeliness of its availability, (ii) the ability to have
accounting information only for ICT services in the scope of the DORA, (iii) the ability to identify
the geographical distribution of the turnover, (iv) the profile of the customers of the CTPPs,
and (v) the criticality of the functions supported by ICT services. Most of these issues are highly
dependent on the first one (data availability). In any case, the defined scope of the applicable
turnover should be consistent with the criticality criteria and with the CTPPs designation
process.
65. With regard to the data available to determine the applicable turnover, the existing delegated
acts on fees46 are using as a basis the revenues generated as they appear in the audited
accounts of the supervised or overseen entity.
66. In addition, audited accounts are generally not made available immediately at the end of the
calendar year. However, it is essential for the ESAs to be able to calculate the applicable fees
for overseen entities and to send the related invoice as soon as possible every year.
Therefore, to ensure the availability of relevant information for all CTPPs and allow ESAs to calculate
applicable fees within appropriate deadlines, it is proposed to refer, in the Delegated Act, to the
certified revenues in the audited accounts of the CTPPs of the year (n-2) as being the information
used to prepare the applicable turnover that will be sent to the ESAs to calculate the oversight fee for
a given year (n). CTPPs are assumed to be well established companies at the time they will be
designated as such and it is expected that they will always be able to provide audited accounts for
the year (n-2). In addition, in order to ensure an equal treatment of all CTPPs and consistent
identification of applicable turnover, such certified audited financial statement representing the
applicable turnover of the CTPPs should be prepared according to IFRS or equivalent local GAAP.
67. The methodology to determine the scope of the applicable turnover proposed in this technical
advice aims at ensuring an equal treatment of all potential CTPPs. In their responses to the
public consultation, several market participants made various suggestions to tailor such
applicable turnover on a limited scope of revenues (from clients of the financial sectors, from
critical services etc). However, overall, such proposals were not aligned and there was no
consensus neither on the capability of all potential CTPPs to provide an ad hoc dedicated
applicable turnover in an identical manner to the ESAs, nor on the ability of independent
auditors to audit and certify such ad hoc applicable turnover.
68. With regard to the scope of revenues of the CTPPs to be taken into account, it is challenging
to determine the applicable turnover based on the ICT services as defined in DORA in Article
46 Please see previous footnote with the list of applicable Delegated Acts
34
3(21)47 given that such definition is not complemented by a list of ICT services from which it
would be possible to identify the generated revenues. Without additional specification (on
such list of ICT services), there is no guarantee of an harmonised approach by all CTPPs to
define their revenues generated by such ICT services. During the public consultation, market
participants invited the ESAs to clarify the list of ICT services before determining the applicable
turnover, in order to only take into account the revenues generated from the provision of such
services in the applicable turnover.
69. The ESAs have proposed to further specify the list of ICT services in the Annex IV of the
consultation paper on a draft Implementing Technical Standards to establish the templates
composing the register of information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use
of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers as mandated by Regulation (EU)
2022/255448. In case such list of ICT services would be included in the final related
Implementing Technical Standards, the ESAs are of the view the applicable turnover could be
determined on the basis of the revenues generated by such ICT services, and not on the basis
of the revenues generated by all services provided by CTPPs. To ensure this proposal to be
possible, the CTPPs will have to isolate these revenues by maintaining separate records or
accounts for their turnover generated by the provision of ICT services and to have independent
auditors certifying the accuracy of these revenues.
70. In case a CTPP would not be able to provide in a timely manner the Lead Overseer with such
audited revenues generated from ICT services only, to ensure no disruption to the overall fees
allocation process, the scope of the applicable turnover used for this CTPP would be based on
all its revenues, irrespective of the types of services provided.
On this basis, if the future Implementing Technical Standards on the register of information in relation
to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service
providers include a list of ICT services as proposed by the ESAs in the related consultation paper
published on 19 June 2023, the ESAs are proposing the Delegated Act to establish that the revenues
generated by such ICT services provided by the CTPPs are considered in the determination of the
applicable turnover. The Delegated Act should also require the CTPPs to isolate these revenues by
maintaining separate records or accounts for their turnover generated by the provision of such ICT
services and to have independent auditors certifying the accuracy of these revenues. In case a CTPP
would not be able to provide in a timely manner the Lead Overseer with such tailored financial
information, the scope of the applicable turnover used for this CTPP would be based on all its
revenues, irrespective of the types of services provided.
In case such a list of ICT services would not be included in this Implementing Technical Standards to
come, the ESAs are proposing the Delegated Act to establish that the revenues generated by all
services provided by the CTPPs are considered in the determination of the applicable turnover.
47 Article 3(21) reads “‘ICT services’ means digital and data services provided through ICT systems to one or more internal or
external users on an ongoing basis, including hardware as a service and hardware services which includes the provision of
technical support via software or firmware updates by the hardware provider, excluding traditional analogue telephone
services”
48 See CP_-_Draft_ITS_on_register_of_information.pdf (europa.eu), Annex IV.
35
71. With regard to the issue of geographical distribution of the revenues of the CTPPs, some CTPPs
may be companies with only European-based activities, but others may receive revenues
generated from activities in non-EU countries. The determined applicable turnover should at
least take into account all revenues generated from the provision of services by CTPPs to
entities subject to DORA, including when such services are provided to European clients by
entities established outside the EU49.
72. During the public consultation, market participants have not confirmed it is possible to
maintain dedicated financial statements focused on revenues generated by the provision of
services to EU-based clients only, in a harmonised way used by all TPPs and did not confirm
independent auditors would be able to audit and certify such dedicated financial statements.
In addition, in the Commission Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under Council Regulation
(EC) No 139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (2008/C 95/01)50,
the Commission states that audited accounts often do not provide a geographical breakdown
and it is therefore necessary to rely on the best figures available. Because of the interrelated
proportionate system to allocate the oversight fees among the CTPPs proposed by the ESAs in
this technical advice, relying on figures calculated on a best effort basis is not appropriate.
Hence, the public consultation did not confirm to the ESAs that all potential CTPPs would be
capable of systematically providing a certified dedicated financial statement with the
geographical distribution of their revenues so as to discount non-EU revenues from the
applicable turnover.
73. However, the ESAs acknowledge the need to reflect the European dimension of the activities
of the CTPPs, which has been raised by several respondents during the public consultation. For
that purpose, instead of adjustment in the scope of the applicable turnover, they propose to
take into account the criticality indicators used to designate the CTPPs (see proposals in this
technical advice) to reflect their importance in the Union. Hence, the fees paid by the CTPPs
would be proportionate to their worldwide applicable turnover, taking their criticality for the
European financial entities into account.
74. In any case, in order to ensure consistency with Article 31(3) of the DORA, within a group, the
applicable turnover of the entities designated as CTPPs would be considered.
49 Pursuant to Article 31(12) of the DORA, TPPs established in a third country can be designated as critical and financial entities
shall only make use of the services of such CTPP if the latter has established a subsidiary in the Union within the 12 months
following the designation.
50 See eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52008XC0416(08)
36
On this basis, in order to ensure an equal treatment of all CTPPs, the ESAs propose to consider as the
applicable turnover the worldwide revenues of the CTPPs adjusted for the criticality of the CTPP in
the EU. Such adjustement will be based on the criticality indicators set out in the Delegated Act. This
will allow the breakdown of the oversight fees to reflect the importance of the CTPPs in the EU, in
the absence of information on the certified EU turnover.
In addition, for practical reasons, it should be clarified in the Delegated Act that if the revenues are
reported in a currency other than the euro, the Lead Overseer would have to convert them into euro
using the average euro foreign exchange rate applicable to the period during which the revenues
were recorded. For that purpose, the euro foreign exchange reference rate published by the
European Central Bank would be used.
75. With regard to the issue of the profile of the clients of the CTPPs, it should be noted that such
providers have, in principle, many kinds of clients, which are not only limited to financial
entities as referred to in Article 2(2) of the DORA. Based on the explanations provided in Recital
(31)51 of the DORA, the Oversight Framework is established to monitor the activities of the
CTPPs provided to “financial entities” as referred to in Article 2(2) of the DORA and thus subject
to the DORA52. It could therefore be argued that only revenues streaming from services
provided to financial entities referred to in Article 2(2) of the DORA and thus subject to the
DORA should be taken into account for the determination of the applicable turnover.
76. However, during the public consultation, market participants have not confirmed it is possible
to maintain dedicated financial statements focused on revenues generated by the provision of
services to financial entities subject to DORA. In order to know this, they explained such clients
should be required to inform their ICT provider about that. However, even if financial entities
were requested to do so, there would never be sufficient guarantee such indication to be duly
provided by all relevant financial entities to all their ICT third-party providers. As a
consequence, market participants did not confirm neither independent auditors would be able
to audit and certify financial statements dedicated to revenues generated by services provided
to this type of clients. Hence, the public consultation did not confirm to the ESAs that all CTPPs
can separate, in a harmonised, consistent and certified manner, revenues generated by
services provided to financial entities subject to the DORA.
On this basis, in order to ensure an equal treatment of all CTPPs, the ESAs recommend not taking the
type of entity to which ICT services are provided into account for the determination of the applicable
turnover.
51 Recital (31) of the DORA reads “[…] it is necessary to establish an appropriate Oversight Framework allowing for a
continuous monitoring of the activities of ICT third-party service providers that are critical ICT third-party service providers
to financial entities, while ensuring that the confidentiality and security of customers other than financial entities is
preserved.”
52 As there are some financial entities not subject to the DORA, such as the ones mentioned in article 2(3) of the DORA or the
ones mentioned in article 58(2) of the DORA.
37
77. With regard to the criticality of the functions supported by ICT services included in the
applicable turnover, based on the reading of Article 33(2) second subparagraph of the DORA,
it appears that the Oversight Framework “shall focus mainly” on ICT services supporting the
critical or important functions of financial entities. However, it is further clarified that “where
necessary” the oversight “shall extend to ICT services supporting functions other than those
that are critical or important”. In addition, it appears very challenging to distinguish in audited
accounts between revenues generated by ICT services supporting critical and non-critical
functions, as the criticality is not inherent to the provided ICT services themselves but to the
functions they support within the concerned financial entities.
78. During the public consultation, several market participants encouraged to take the criticality
of the services into account. However, there was no alignment on the way the “criticality" was
understood, as some of them mentioned the criticality of the functions relying of the ICT
services, while other made reference to an inherent criticality of the provided ICT services (to
make a distinction between the various services CTPPs can provide). In addition, some market
participants confirmed CTPPs do not have information on the criticality of the functions of their
clients supported by the provided ICT services.
79. Hence, the ESAs are of the view that the level of criticality of the functions supported by ICT
services should not be used as a criterion by the CTPPs to determine their applicable turnover.
Therefore, the ESAs are proposing not to use, in the Delegated Act, the criticality of the functions
supported by the provided ICT services as a criterion to determine the applicable turnover of the CTPPs.
80. To conclude, account taken of all of the above considerations, the ESAs are proposing the
following allocation key to determine the applicable turnover of the designated CTTPs: it would
be calculated on the basis of the revenues of ICT services provided to all their clients, on the
basis of the audited worldwide revenues, and adjusted to reflect their criticality in the EU.
38
Methods of calculation of the Oversight fees
81. In respect of the methods of calculations of the oversight fees, the first issue is to determine
if the collected fees should be adapted yearly or fixed. To date, both approaches are used by
the ESAs, but for different kinds of fees. Registration, recognition and certification fees to be
paid by financial entities are generally envisaged as “fixed” fees. In some cases, their amount
can however be adjusted based on (i) the complexity of the application, (ii) the size of the
concerned entity (for instance, entities with a smaller number of employees can be subject to
a smaller amount of registration fees), or (iii) the expected turnover. This assumes an advanced
determination of every possible situation with different fee buckets (e.g. depending on the
number of employees, the diversity of activities, the expected turnover, etc) to make it
adaptable to the potential changes of the entities subject to such fees. Given the CTPPs will be
designated only after the application of the DORA, it is not possible to determine fixed fees in
the Delegated Act since neither the exact amount of oversight expenditure nor the exact
number of CTPPs will be known before the oversight framework is fully established.
82. With regard to existing annual supervisory fees, on the basis of the principle of annuality and
the principle of full cost recovery, they are calculated based on the estimated (direct and
indirect) costs (including the costs incurred by the CAs)53. While these estimated costs are
generally consistent from one year to the next, there is still a need to adjust them every year.
The total annual fees are therefore adjusted every year to match the estimated costs. At entity
level, the annual fee is calculated based on a “fully proportionate approach”, i.e. the fee
charged is determined as a prorated amount that corresponds to the percentage represented
by the applicable turnover of the charged entity compared to the sum of applicable turnovers
of all supervised entities.
83. Therefore, based on their experience, the ESAs are of the view that yearly adaptable fees
calculated through a fully proportionate approach should be used to calculate the annual
oversight fees for CTPPs. The ESAs recognize that such approach contains some challenges, in
particular in terms of predictability for both the CTPPs and the ESAs. The annual fees being
proportionate to the applicable turnovers of CTPPs, this might result in a small number of
CTPPs supporting a large part of the funding of the framework in case of significant disparity
among overseen entities.
84. To ensure all entities contribute to the funding of the framework on a minimum basis, some
existing delegated acts (e.g. for trade repositories, securitisation repositories, benchmark and
data reporting service providers) include a requirement for a minimum annual supervisory
fixed fee. This gives a bit more predictability to the concerned entities. In addition, it ensures
coverage of the ESAs’ minimum cost estimated for the oversight of one entity regardless its
size. During the public consultation, market participants challenged the proposal of the ESAs
(EUR 50 000), either to have clarification on such amount, or to suggest to align it on the yearly
costs of 1 FTE. This minimum threshold is aligned with the minimum fees paid by financial
53 The assessment relies on the estimation of the expenditure calculated by ESAs’ Activity Based Budgeting model and is part
of the overall planning and budgeting process of all activities of the authorities (i.e., not only the one related to oversight or
supervisory tasks).
39
entities already supervised by the ESAs, which ensure a fair treatment across entities under
the direct responsibility of the ESAs. Such minimum fees should not significantly reduce the
proportionality of the proposed method of calculation.
Therefore, the ESAs are proposing the Delegated Act to determine a method of calculation fully
proportionate to the applicable turnover of the CTPPs concerned, on the following basis:
applicable turnover of this CTPP
% 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑝𝑝 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑜 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 =
applicable turnover of all CTPPs
To ensure that all CTPPs pay a relevant annual fee, including the “smallest” ones, such calculation
should be complemented by a minimum fixed oversight fee, which would be paid if the fee resulting
from the calculation above is smaller than such threshold. The ESAs are proposing such minimum fee
to be fixed at EUR 50 00054.
85. Another important aspect is to determine at what level the annual fees should be calculated,
i.e. if the applicable turnover of the CTPPs is compared with the applicable turnover of the
other CTPPs overseen by the same Lead Overseer or with the applicable turnover of all the
CTPPs overseen by the three ESAs considered together. To recall, based on Article 31(1)(b) of
the DORA, the appointment of the Lead Overseers will only rely on “the financial entities
having together the largest share of total assets out of the value of total assets of all financial
entities using the ICT services of the CTPPs, as evidenced by the sum of the individual balance
sheets of those financial entities”. This could lead to differences regarding the number and the
size of CTPPs being overseen by the three ESAs.
86. If there is an expected relation between the estimated oversight costs and the number and
the size of the CTPPs each Lead Overseer will have in its remit, this relation is not expected to
be fully linear. The oversight expenditure will indeed integrate some fixed costs (i.e. costs that
are related to the number and size of overseen CTPPs) and will also depend on the intensity of
the oversight conduct that may be deemed necessary by each Lead Overseer (on the basis of
the identified risks for each CTPP). In addition, some expenditure will be commonly “shared”
(for instance, when the ESA staff work in a JET led by another ESA). For these reasons,
calculating the annual fees applying the “fully proportionate approach” at the level of each
Lead Overseer might lead to inconsistent fees being charged to CTPPs considered all together.
87. The ESAs therefore recommend adopting an approach which ensures that (i) each Lead
Overseer will be able to cover 100% of its estimated oversight expenditure and (ii) there is no
bias in the invoiced oversight fees due to the appointed ESA (proportionality applied at cross-
ESAs level and considered all CTPPs together).
54 Such minimum fees to be indexed each year
40
To ensure appropriate proportionality and comparability amongst all the CTPPs, the ESAs are
proposing the Delegated Act to determine the calculation of the annual oversight fees at cross-ESAs
level.
In practice, each ESA – and each involved competent authority - will calculate its estimated costs to
cover its direct and indirect oversight tasks for the following year. The sum of these estimated costs
will be used as a basis to apply the fully proportionate calculation method and considering all CTPPs
together.
The fees will be collected by the ESAs in the Lead Overseer role which will then reallocate the
collected fees among the other ESAs based on their estimated total oversight expenditure55.
88. With regard to the potential deficits or surpluses, the proposal of the ESAs is aligned with the
Commission interpretation of the financial regulation. The total amount of the ESAs budget
(including the total amount of annual fees, EU subsidy and contribution from the National
Competent Authorities) is determined on the basis of their Activity-Based Management
methodology. At the end of the financial year, any surplus from the ESAs total budget is
recovered by the Commission in line with the principle of universality56. The same logic applies
for potential deficit, not recovered by the ESAs from the CTPPs at the end of the year.
89. Finally, it is important to stress that, through the existing mechanisms in place (EU budgetary
procedure, annual reporting, single programming document), any decision concerning the
level of the ESAs total budget as well as the level of income per fund sources is adopted by the
ESAs Board of Supervisors, of which the EC is a permanent Member. Furthermore, on a yearly
basis, the European Court of Auditors assesses the regularity and accuracy in the
implementation of ESAs’ budget, including the fee-funded budget, in line with the EU Financial
Regulation57. The final audit report is communicated to the European Parliament and Council
in the context of the ESAs budgetary discharge.
55 And with the involved competent authorities to reimburse their expenditures, see below.
56 At the end of each year, the Commission recovers the total surplus generated by all sources of income (including fee
revenues). See ESAs financial regulation article 17(1).
57 Framework Financial Regulation for TFEU bodies, i.e. Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/715 on the framework
financial regulation for the bodies set up under the TFEU and Euratom Treaty and referred to in Article 70 of Regulation (EU,
Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 122, 10.5.2019, p. 1).
41
Based on the Commission interpretation of the Financial Regulation, the ESAs expect the Delegated
Act to establish the following treatment for the management of the potential deficits or surpluses for
the oversight fees collected from CTPPs:
• In case of deficits (the ESAs collects less than incurred), the ESAs do not recover the deficit
from CTPPs;
• In case of surpluses (the ESAs collects more fees than incurred), the ESAs do not pay back the
surplus to CTPPs, and such surpluses would be fully given to the Commission in the year Y+1
following the annual financial accounts, like for other types of surpluses (coming from EU
subsidy or NCAs contributions) in line with the principles of annuality and universality.
42
Practical issues related to the payment of the fees
90. With regard to the modalities and the schedule of payment of the fees, in some existing ESAs
practices, fees are collected once a year (one-instalment system). In other cases, they are
collected twice per year (two-instalment system), with the first instalment being based on the
estimated annual fees before the financial accounts of the entity are available and the second
instalment on the actual annual fees calculated based on the financial accounts and reduced
by the amount of the first instalment. This second system is particularly relevant with respect
to fees that are calculated based on (n-1) audited accounts (which are generally not available
when the first instalment is paid). However, experience shows that this differentiated
treatment (two-instalment system) complicates the collection of the fees and budgetary
management of both the ESAs and the supervised entities. More specifically, the two-
instalment approach is more burdensome (more calculation and invoicing) and has only
limited benefits for entities (in practice calculating fees based on (n-2) audited account leads
to similar fees being collected over time).
Therefore, the ESAs are proposing, in the Delegated Act, to establish a one-instalment payment for
the collection of the annual oversight fees from all CTPPs. In case CTPPs are designated for 1st
January, the debit note would be sent by end March with a 30 days payment term (i.e. by the end
of April) each year.
As some CTPPs may be third country entities, it is also proposed to specify in the Delegated Act that
all the fees will be invoiced and paid in Euros.
91. Based on the previous proposals, for the oversight conducted during year “n”, annual oversight
fees paid by the CTPPs would be based on their (n-2) applicable turnover with a one-instalment
system at the end of April of year n. To reduce the probability of partial oversight during the
first year, the ESAs assume they will as far as possible update the list of CTPPs (and notify the
designated companies58) shortly before the end of the last quarter each year, so that the
oversight activities could begin on 1 January of the following year. Such practice would give
sufficient time to the ESAs to organize the oversight of the new CTPPs and to facilitate the
management of the fees (each time a full year). The response to the potential voluntary opt-
in requests could be finalised to the same timeline when it is consistent with Article 31(11) of
the DORA, to align all the processes. This would also allow the potential third country CTPPs
to establish their subsidiary in the Union in accordance with Article 31(12) of the DORA
enabling initiation of the oversight activities from on January n+2.
92. However, during the public consultation, some market participants highlighted the difficulty
to audit and certify their financial statements in case they would have to prepare dedicated
ones (on a reduced scope compared with the regular comprehensive turnover) for the need
of the oversight fees allocation. Hence, the ESAs assume the CTPPs will need time to prepare
58 Given that Article 31(5) second subparagraph of the DORA reads the “starting date [of the oversight] shall be no later than
one month after the notification [of the designation as CTPP]”.
43
their relevant applicable turnover on the adequate scope (as proposed in this technical advice).
In order to grant sufficient time for this preparation, the ESAs are of the view that all CTPPs
should pay fixed fees the first year they are designated, without prejudice of the proposal
made by the ESAs for the first group of designated CTPPs when DORA will be implemented. In
case a provider is effectively designated as a CTPP during a given year, due to the voluntary
opt-in request process for instance59, a time coefficient should be applied to the same amount
of fixed fees, taking into account the number of effective oversight days during the year.
Therefore, the ESAs propose the Delegated Act to impose that the first year a CTPP is designated, it
should pay a fixed fees of EUR 500 000. The cumulated fixed fees paid by such CTPPs and the annual
oversight fees paid by the other CTPPs would have to cover together all costs derived from oversight
activities (i.e. the overall amount of the fees paid by the other CTPPs would be reduced by the overall
amounts of the fixed fees paid by the newly designated CTPPs, in order that the sum is equal to 100%
of the estimated annual oversight expenditures).
This proposal of fixed fees is not applicable for the first group of CTPPs the ESAs will designate when
DORA will apply, as a dedicated fees allocation process is proposed in parallel in this technical advice.
In the case of a partial year of oversight due to a designation (or positive notification to an opt-in
request) during the year, the ESAs are proposing that the Delegated Act imposes the same fixed fees,
taking into account the number of effective oversight days during the year60: EUR 500 000*(number
of days when overseen/365 days). However, in that case, such fixed fees would not be discounted
from the total overall aggregated amount of the yearly estimated oversight fees paid by the other
already designated CTPPs as it would be charged later in the year, while the other CTPPs would have
already received their debit note or paid their yearly oversight fees.
Such fees would be paid within 30 days from the issuance of LO’s debit note at the start of the
oversight activities.
93. The ESAs deem also useful to specify in the Delegated Act how the competent authorities
involved in the oversight tasks will be reimbursed. In some existing delegated regulations61,
the reimbursement of the actual costs of CAs incurred as a result of carrying out delegated
tasks is explicitly foreseen. This includes all fixed and variable costs related to the performance
of the tasks or to the assistance provided to the ESAs. For CTTPs oversight, it appears to be
useful for both the ESAs and the competent authorities to clarify on which basis the competent
authorities will be reimbursed by the ESAs. For the CTPPs, this would also clarify that all costs
will be covered by the ESA’s invoices. In order to facilitate oversight budget management of
the competent authorities, it appears more efficient for the ESAs to reimburse the competent
authorities in due time after they have collected the oversight fees from the CTPPs, so on the
59 Article 31(11) third subparagraph of the DORA reads that “the decision referred […] shall be adopted and notified to the
ICT third-party service provider within 6 months of receipt of the application”, so it will depend when it is received by the
ESAs during the year.
60 Such fees to be indexed each year
61 See for instance article 9(2) of Regulation (EU) No 272/2012 of 7 February 2012 or article 12(2) of Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2019/360 of 13 December 2018.
44
basis of the estimated expenditure of the competent authorities. Hence, both the ESAs and
the competent authorities can fund their oversight activities with the collected oversight fees
during the year.
The ESAs are, thus, proposing to specify in the Delegated Act that only the ESAs through the Lead
Overseer will charge fees to CTPPs (taking into account the estimated expenditure of the involved
competent authorities, as proposed in this technical advice). It should also be indicated that the
competent authorities will be reimbursed for their estimated (fixed and variable) costs.
94. The first time that ESAs will designate CTPPs (first year of designation of CTPPs), an ad hoc
approach may be considered to fully fund the first oversight tasks, depending on the timing of
the first designation. In that case, the overall oversight expenditure would be estimated in the
annual budget of the ESAs at the end of the previous year, before the ESAs know the actual
number and the profile of the CTPPs. The estimation of such expenditure would rely on the
scope of oversight expenditure as presented above. However, the allocation of the oversight
fees would, exceptionally, not depend on the applicable turnover of the CTPPs because it is
assumed that during the first year of the concerned CTPPs would not have sufficient time to
prepare and to send their certified audited financial accounts to the ESAs. Instead, it would
depend on the number of designated CTPPs: indeed, the overall estimated oversight fees of
the ESAs would be equally allocated among the designated CTPPs (each CTPP would pay the
same amount exceptionally). The payment would rely on one-instalment approach, and the
payment date would depend on the designation date.
95. For this very first year of the oversight framework implementation, it is neither suggested to
rely on fixed fees proposed in parallel for the CTPPs which will be designated for the first time
during the following years. Indeed, such approach is not fully based on overall estimated
expenditure of a particular year (but on an average), while the expenditure incurred by the
oversight activities related to the oversight of these first designated CTPPs would be as far as
possible anticipated in the annual budget of the ESAs.
Hence, the ESAs are proposing to specify in the Delegated Act that, exceptionally during the first year
of CTPPs designation, the related oversight fees would be equally charged to the designated CTPPs,
the amount for each CTPP depending on the overall estimated expenditure of the ESAs and the number
of designated CTPPs. Such fees would be paid based on the one-instalment system, within 30 days
from the issuance of Lead Overseer’s debit note at the start of the oversight activities.
96. The ESAs understand that the call for technical advice of the Commission does not invite them
to propose approaches on how to manage the late payment of the oversight fees. However,
as it is a fundamental requirement in the existing fee regulations, the ESAs consider it
appropriate to also cover this aspect in the Delegated Act on oversight fees.
45
97. Here again, different approaches exist. In some cases (e.g. for the supervision of CRAs, TRs
(including TRs under SFTR), SRs, benchmark administrators62), a daily penalty equal to a fixed
percentage of the amount due is applied. In other cases (e.g. for the supervision of DRSPs and
TC CCPs63), the default interest laid down in Article 99 of Regulation 2018/104664 applies. As
already flagged in previous pieces of advice65, the ESAs would suggest referring to the default
interest laid down in Article 99 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 for all categories of
supervised entities in view of ensuring consistency of approaches.
On this basis, to manage potential late payments of the annual oversight fees, the ESAs are
proposing to rely, in the Delegated Act, on Regulation 2018/1046 and to apply the default interest
laid down in Article 99 of this Regulation.
62 CDR (EU) No 272/2012 of 7 February 2012, CDR (EU) No 1003/2013 of 12 July 2013, CDR (EU) No 2020/1732 of 18
September 2020, CDR (EU) No 2022/805 of 16 February 2022 and CDR (EU) No 2019/360 of 13 December 2018.
63 CDR (EU) No 2022/930 of 10 March 2022 and CDR (EU) No 2020/1302 of 14 July 2020.
64 Article 99 of the “Financial Regulation” relates to the rate applied by the European Central Bank to its principal refinancing
operations, Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/ of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 July 2018 on the financial
rules applicable to the general budget of the Union, amending Regulations (EU) No 1296/2013, (EU) No 1301/2013, (EU) No
1303/2013, (EU) No 1304/2013, (EU) No 1309/2013, (EU) No 1316/2013, (EU) No 223/2014, (EU) No 283/2014, and Decision
No 541/2014/EU and repealing Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 (europa.eu)
65 For instance the technical Advice on Fees Charged to CRAs by ESMA dated 21 June 2021 (ESMA80-196-5170) and Technical
advice to EC on simplification and harmonisation of fees to TRs under EMIR and SFTR dated 8 July 2021 (ESMA74-362-1978).
46
Treatment of the opt-in application
98. There is no explicit provision in the DORA related to the cost to be paid by the TPPs for their
application to opt in to the Oversight Framework on a voluntary basis in accordance with
Article 31(11) of the DORA. However, the assessment of such opt-in requests will oblige the
ESAs to dedicate specific resources to analyse and assess the applications; and such resources
should be compensated for. Therefore, consistent with existing requirements for the
registration or certification fees for entities in the direct supervision remit of ESMA, which are
deemed to be relatively comparable activities, it is proposed to establish a financial
contribution for opt-in requests.
99. If designated as CTPPs at the end of the assessment, such new TPPs would pay oversight fees
like any other CTPP.
Hence, the ESAs are proposing to define, in the Delegated Act, a fixed fee that ICT service providers
would have to pay when they submit opt-in application to the ESAs. Account taken of and in
comparison with the variety of the fixed fees charged by ESMA for its certification and registration
activities, the ESAs are of the view that the opt-in TPPs pay a fee of EUR 50 00066.
Such fixed fees will not be refundable because a significant amount of work goes into assessing a
request from the initial stage. Therefore, if the applicant withdraws its application before the end of
the assessment, or if the notified decision is negative, the paid fees will not be reimbursed.
66 Such fees to be indexed each year
47
Annex I – Detailed feedback statement
Feedback on the public consultation
For the purposes of this advice, and in accordance with the ESAs Regulation, the ESAs have widely
consulted market participants, in an open and transparent manner. In particular, the ESAs published
on 26 May 2023 a discussion paper on their advice to the European Commission on two delegated acts
specifying further criteria for critical ICT third-party service providers (CTPPs) and determining
oversight fees levied on such providers. The discussion paper was published on the websites of the
three ESAs and invited market participants’ comments on all the proposals put forward and in
particular to a series of questions presented throughout the discussion paper. Given the timeline of
this advice, the consultation ended on 23 June 2023 where the ESAs received 41 responses. The
feedback collected has been taken into account in the resulting opinions of the ESAs’ advice. Below, a
detailed feedback is presented for each part of the discussion paper noting that comments have been
consolidated accordingly as for example in many cases several industry bodies made similar comments
or the same body repeated its comments in the response to different questions.
Criticality criteria
General remarks (Questions 1-5 in the discussion paper)
Indicative process for criticality assessment
• Six respondents expressed general support on the proposed two-step approach with request to
clarify that the criteria will cumulatively lead to an ICT TPP being designated as critical. Otherwise,
non-critical TPPs may fall under the oversight framework. However, three respondents proposed
the criteria to apply sequentially with the orderly application of each criterion during the
assessment process to reduce the initial broad list of services considered.
• One respondent noted the importance of an objective, documented, evidence-based criticality
assessment of CTPPs to ensure transparency, fairness and efficacy. Similarly, another respondent
proposed to employ objective, measurable factors for the criteria and to avoid subjective or
indeterminate factors to ensure workability. View that a CTPP designation decision should be
made after application of these criteria to relevant ICT services, not through retroactive evaluation
after designation of a CTPP.
• Two respondents proposed for the metrics/data basis for the indicators to be as clear and
consistent as possible. For example, it is unclear how a TPP will be assessed if it considers critical
for the banking sector but not for the insurance sector (under indicator 1.1). Proposal to validate
the criteria and the proposed thresholds using practical examples and, if necessary, to make the
significance more comprehensible.
• One respondent proposed to consider the notion of "regionality" in the criteria. This would filter
out TPPs that have a very high presence in a specific region, but whose presence is not as
representative at pan-European level. An operational failure of this type of TPPs would have a
48
substantial negative impact in a certain region with a risk of contagion to financial entities in other
regions (due to their dependencies).
• Four respondents noted that the need for further clarification or guidance on the definition of
‘ICT services’ and suggested the development of a taxonomy in this regard. This could also specify
which ICT services are considered critical. Proposal for certain services to fall out of the definition
(e.g. on-premise software license, maintenance, support services, professional services that may
be provided upon client’s request) as these are not provided on an ongoing basis. Such a taxonomy
should align with the market reality and benefit from the TPPs’ technical expertise during the
development of the taxonomy.
• Four respondents proposed to specify which ICT services would be considered critical. One
respondent highlighted that this holds in particular as a first step to filter out non-critical services
offered by a TPP. The criteria and their administration should distinguish between these categories
of ICT services to avoid overinclusion and imposition of undue burdens and costs on both CTPPs,
financial entities, ESAs/Lead Overseers. Similarly, another two respondents recommended the
designation and subsequent oversight of CTPPs should revolve around critical ICT services and the
failure or disruption of which could adversely impact financial stability. These critical ICT services
could be clarified by the ESAs. One respondent proposed for the ESAs to consider existing practices
in the EU and other jurisdictions in relation to the definition of important or critical business
services and to seek alignment on definitions to facilitate predictability and trackability of those
services across all the ICT CTPPs.
• Similarly, three respondents noted the proposed indicators are too focused on the number of
financial entities using the ICT services and do not reflect the nature of the ICT services provided.
Proposal for the indicators to be more closely linked to operational continuity if a disruption occurs
and to criterion 4 on substitutability.
• One respondent commented that financial entities could benefit from a sufficient number of ICT
TPPs being designated as critical as outsourcing to a CTPP overseen by the ESAs could be
facilitated, including compliance with the related legal requirements.
• Six respondents highlighted that further clarity on paragraph 27 of the Discussion Paper regarding
the assessment of sub-contractors during the designation exercise. The respective register should
not request from financial entities to track and document every subcontractor in their supply chain
for all ICT TPPs used. Rather, the CTPPs should be designated on the basis of their contractual
relationship with the financial entities only at the first level of the chain. Fixe respondents
proposed to clarify or provide guidance on the treatment of subcontractors (including fourth-
party relationships, intragroup relationships) and in designation. Another respondent proposed
to request from the relevant CTPP the relevant information about its sub-contractors. A
respondent noted that in most cases subcontractors do not have contractual arrangements with
EU financial entities and therefore it is unclear whether these subcontractors will need to establish
an EU entity in case they are established in a third country.
• A respondent proposed to perform the criticality assessment following a risk-based approach
and assessing the impact of the unavailability of an ICT TPP.
49
• Three respondents considered the proposed thresholds rather low which would result in a large
number of CTPPs. This may continue pose a challenge for the sector as it prepares for the DORA
implementation. Proposal to focus on the most critical ICT services provided by a smaller number
TPPs.
• One respondent expressed concerns on the group application of the criticality criteria. Proposal
to consider the criticality criteria separately for ICT services provided by different entities within
the same group rather than in a way which is accumulative. View that it would appear odd if two
businesses operated separately would not meet the thresholds but if considered at group level
(same parent entity) (or visa-versa). Similarly, three participants noted uncertainty in relation to
the designation of entities within a group while acknowledging the fact that criticality assessment
should cover all entities within a group. Proposal to provide guidance on this issue and for a single
entity to be designated and be responsible for DORA compliance as it would be most efficient for
CTPPs, financial entities and Lead Overseers. For example, an ICT TPP group may provide multiple
different ICT services to financial entities which could meet (i) both Step 1 and 2 indicators, (ii)
meet Step 1 but not Step 2 (or vice versa); or (iii) meet neither. A respondent noted several
challenges on the criticality assessment and potential designation at group level. In case of
insufficient clarity on the scope of the oversight, there is a risk of weak oversight. Proposal to apply
criticality assessment at entity or group level, designation to be primarily driven by (i) the ESAs
focusing on specific ICT services that raise operational resilience concerns; and (ii) base the
designation on the TPP that provides such ICT services, and (iii) target the associated ESA oversight
around those ICT services.
• Another respondent recommended the ESAs to produce an evidence-based rationale detailing
the operational resilience risks they aim to mitigate when considering a group as a whole (as
opposed to services provided by a group company), in particular clarifying whether and how they
see any potential risk of contagion between an individual ICT TPP and the group to which it belongs.
Other two respondents suggested the adoption of a pragmatic approach for designation
purposes as designating various individual entities within the same group as CTPPs, based on the
ICT services provided by the ‘group as a whole’, could have unintended consequences. Proposal
for the ESAs to avoid generating an unnecessary administrative burden by designating multiple
entities within the group as CTPPs as suggested in paragraph 26 of the Discussion Paper.
• Another respondent noted that the scope of the Oversight Framework should not go beyond what
is necessary to achieve its underlying objectives, also taking into account its effectiveness and
necessary workload. It is further proposed that the potential CTPP should require a contractual
arrangement with EU financial entities as this could allow for transparency and effective oversight
processes.
• A respondent proposed that in case an ICT TPP is part of a group comprised of financial entities
and non-financial entities, the ICT TPPs part of that group should be excluded from the oversight
framework similar to the entities to be excluded under DORA Article 31.8(i).
• One participant proposed to consider the entire vendor chain as a significant number of firms
have indirect relationships with fourth-party providers who have faced breaches.
50
• One respondent requested to know more about the joint-ESAs high-level exercise on the ICT TPP
landscape and related additional simulations, especially if financial entities are expected to be
involved.
• Three respondents highlighted that due to the specific scope of DORA oversight and the wider
scope of NISD2, proposal not to use the essential or important entities under NISD2 as a starting
point for the designation of CTPPs. Moreover, proposal by three respondents to further specify
how this aspect will inform designation process, including integration with other Step 2 indicators
and weight in the overall assessment.
• One respondent highlighted that existing data sources and the registers of information would be
sufficient for the designation of CTPPs. Proposal to avoid expanding the data requested via the
registers solely for the purposes of the criticality assessment.Moreover, to reduce additional
reporting burden on financial entities, it is proposed by one participant to collect relevant data
from competent authorities, if available.
• Proposal by one respondent for a gradual approach for the application of the indicative
thresholds where initially they could be placed at a higher level to allow the oversight of the largest
TPPs, and subsequently, to consider the use of lower thresholds. This is to account for the impact
of a potential “quasi certification” system to ICT services’ market as a consequence of the DORA
oversight. Similarly, proposal by one participant to consider the evolution when determining the
indicators and for the ESAs to be targeted and controlled and look to expand at a later stage if
necessary. Proposal to treat the minimum relevance thresholds (Step 1) as more meaningful initial
sift of potential criticality. Proposal to put greater importance to criterion 1 and 3 due to their
outcome-based focus on the systemic impact from a TPP failure.
• One participant set out the view that criticality may well not exist even where thresholds are
exceeded. Proposal (where possible) for the FEs to be encouraged to present to the ESAs the
TPPs they consider critical. Proposal to also consider whether potential CTPPs may already fall
under sectorial legislation.
• While it is understood that the CfA is requesting the ESAs to further specify the criticality criteria,
five participants noted that it would be useful to publish at a later stage a clear guidance on the
assessment/methodology, including the precise number of thresholds together with the overall
indicator/criteria weighting, as this could also support financial entities’ own internal assessments
and enhance consistency across the industry. It should be made clearer how, in the further process,
the criteria will be used to determine the CTPPs. Four respondents noted that all information
related to the designation of CTPPs should be reviewed holistically by ICT TPPs to allow for a
sufficient understanding of the future oversight framework. Proposal to publicly consult on the
methodology and designation procedure ahead of the first designation, providing adequate
review time.
• One respondents proposed for the CTPPs’ identification process to align with the Central
Securities Depositories Regulation (CSDR) and international standards (e.g. IOSCO Principles for
Financial Market Infrastructures) to avoid duplication of measures and communication
requirements. In particular, the criticality criteria may build on the current criteria laid down by
sector-specific regulation.
51
• Proposal by one participant to base the indicators on total assets per type of financial entity.
• One respondent proposed to use absolute values instead of percentage values.
Minimum lifecycle duration
• One respondent expressed support for the aim to ensure that the list of designated CTPPs is stable
over time in order to manage threshold effects. Eight respondents recommended 3 years are in
line with cross-industry life cycles noting also there could be a specific business context to passing
certain thresholds.
• Five respondents proposed the minimum turnover time in the CTPPs’ list to be shorter as 3 years
are perceived excessive given the fast pace of technological developments, suggestion for 1 or 2
years. Three respondents proposed to allow flexibility and also to use a moving average as it may
lead to a quicker release for the list (taking into account the high regulatory burden when
designated as CTPP).
• Three respondents proposed to apply similar approach in reverse to ensure stability of the CTPPs’
list in both directions and to ensure more consistency between the entry and exit to the regime.
• Five respondents proposed to also consider alternative exit scenarios from the CTPPs’ list such as
the possibility to allow proactive opt-out by a CTPP (e.g. due to divestment, change in services
offerings, etc.), discretionary right by the Lead Overseer to appoint and remove a CTPP for planned
or undertaken events (e.g. mergers, divestments of activities), qualitative assessment similar to
the approach of the Directive on Resilience of Critical Entities (2020/0365). A respondent proposed
immediate removal from the list.
• Another respondent noted that removal from the CTPPs’ list should result from an overall
assessment rather than focusing only on the thresholds to mirror the initial designation approach.
• Two respondents noted the importance for a CTPP to remain accountable for the remediation
actions defined/planned during the oversight, even when it stops being designated as “critical”.
Other related issues
• One participant expressed uncertainty on the amount of information and the process to engage
with competent authorities, which creates a significant administrative burden mainly for
small/medium ICT TPPs. Proposal to standardise approach to request information in relation to
ICT services/arrangements.
• Two respondents proposed for the design of the indicators to be as simple as possible to avoid
additional reporting burden for the financial entities.
• A respondent proposed for the criticality assessment to provide a clear link between the risks
posed by ICT TPPs and the potential impact on financial entities’ ability to operate their core
services.
• Another respondent noted the need of more clarity on the calculation of indicators as well as
further sector-specific indications through upcoming dedicated information.
52
• One respondent highlighted the importance of obtaining a comprehensive understanding of the
dependencies and interconnections between the cloud service providers and the other ICT third-
party providers to enable the assessment of the potential impact of TPPs’ failures or disruptions
on the availability, integrity, and confidentiality of cloud services.
• A respondent proposed the ESAs to explore the use of cyber risk ratings as a key metric in the
criticiality assessment and ongoing monitoring of ICT TPPs.
• Another respondent noted that the introduction of wider factors will hamper compatibility with
the key characteristics outlined in the discussion paper, especially the need for designation criteria
to be relevant and timely.
• A respondent proposed the financial entities to report in a structured manner the ICT services
they receive and also functions supported by these ICT services. Moreover, it is proposed to have
baseline metric concerning the systemic impact a TPP may have on the provision of financial
services e.g. establish an inclusion benchmark that an ICT service will meet this criterion if at least
20% of relevant financial entities rely on it for critical functions.
• A respondent proposed to define critical ICT services using an inclusion benchmark e.g. if an ICT
service is used to support critical or important functions of 20% of G-SIIs or O-SIIs.
• A respondent mentioned that the ESAs will have the right to designate ICT TPPs as “critical” at
any given moment.
• Two participants highlighted practical challenges in assessing the interaction of the criticality
criteria e.g. a TPP may serve numerous financial entities by providing low impact ICT services and
thus irrelevant for step 2 assessment or not clear whether subcontractors will be assessed only for
criterion 4. Two respondents stressed that it’s important to know the weighting given to each
criterion and the relationship between them to allow an appropriate assessment. Proposal to
assess the criteria sequentially with the orderly application of each criterion during the assessment
process reducing an initial broad list of ICT services considered.
• Two participants noted that the varying use of relevant terms (e.g. ICT TPPs, critical or important
functions, etc.) may be an obstacle and it is proposed to maintain a functioning reporting-
structure (bottom-up) of indicators and assuring their correctness.
• A respondent proposed to also consider the concentration risk at Member State level in the
interest of proportionality.
• A respondent raised concerns on the potential application of minimum thresholds per ‘type of
financial entity’ as it is understood that these will apply to all the entities listed in DORA Article 2
(a) to (t), including to ‘institutions for occupational retirement provision’. Given the relatively small
landscape of these institutions, it is not considered appropriate for these institutions to be
considered systemically important financial institutions and subsequently for the pension fund
service providers to be designated as CTPPs. It is proposed to apply a holistic assessment of the
criteria and moreover, to raise the proposed minimum threshold on type of assets.
• Two respondents noted the practical challenges in the collection of the necessary data to assess
the proposed indicators. Proposal for the data to be publicly available or filed with appropriate
53
authorities as well as collect data directly from the TPPs. Another three respondents noted the
need to leverage on existing data sources without adding reporting burden to the financial
entities and hence to reconsider all the proposed indicators based on the data available. Some
data could be also provided by the competent authorities, for example the assets under
management (AUM). It was also noted that both the registers of information and the proposed
indicators should not include data of a sensitive nature e.g. “annual expenses or estimated costs
of the contractual agreements”, which it can also prove difficult to estimate (such information
would not bring added value to the CTPPs’ designation. It was further proposed to introduce in the
future a notification/interface with the relevant competent authorities to provide the required
data.
• A respondent raised concerns on potential delays if relying only on the registers of information for
the designation of CTPPs as both the registers and the list of CTPPs are expected from January
2025.
• Two respondents raised concern on the potential poor data quality to be used for the criticiality
assessment as well as for oversight purposes. As this data will rely on the registers of information
to be provided by the financial entities it is proposed for the register to be consistent (e.g. clear
taxonomy and guidance) and granular. High-level and inconsistent data could inevitably lead either
to inaccurate conclusions or to future oversight on non-relevant ICT services. Further clarity was
requested on the additional data sources that can be used by the ESAs.
Criterion 1 (Questions 6-11 in the discussion paper)
Indicator 1.1
• Four respondents noted that the metric on the total number of financial entities should not be
considered in isolation and more elements could be considered such as balance sheet totals,
market penetration, customer volume or similar business criteria, when also considered in
conjunction with criterion 2. Same respondent noted there is no direct correlation between total
assets and provision of ICT services.
• A respondent proposed to replace the metric on total number of financial entities with the total
revenues of financial entities as it could considered a more representative indicator. Another
respondent noted that all financial entities seem to be given the same weight. It is proposed for
the size of the financial entities to consider the number of customers in total or by the number of
customers for special customer sectors.
• Two participants noted that indicators 1.1 should put more emphasis on the type of ICT services
provided to avoid unintended results. It is proposed for indicator 1.1 to consider ICT services
supporting critical or important functions of financial entities. Similarly, another participant
proposed for indicators 1.2 and 1.3 to consider ICT services supporting critical or important
functions of financial entities. Another participant proposed to exclude non-material ICT services
from criterion 1.
• Two respondents raised concern on the 10% threshold as this seems to be very low and it will not
act as an effective gateway. It is proposed to use a higher one to be systemically relevant. Another
respondent noted the 10% threshold may not be adequate to disqualify the ICT services which
54
would not cause a disruption if they failed. For example, an ICT TPP can be in a position to provide
ICT services to many financial entities (more than 10%) however a potential disruption of these ICT
services will not negatively impact the operations and activities of those financial entities. Proposal
for a higher threshold.
• Two respondents raised concerns on how indicator 1.1 will be assessed per each type of financial
entity and whether it would be practicable to assess criticality per financial sub-sector.
• Two respondents noted the need for further explanation on how subcontractors will be captured
in indicators in 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. Another respondent raised concerns in taking into account the
subcontractors for assessing criterion 1 as this is not specified in DORA Article 31(2)(a) as it does
in DORA Article 31(2)(c). Such a request via the registers of information will oblige the financial
entities to monitor and document additional elements for each of their TPPs that subcontracts
services to another provider. This is considered quite broad and burdensome. Proposal to limit
such indirect ICT services only when these support critical or important functions of the financial
entities.
• A respondent noted that while there may be a concentration of financial entities using a specific
CTPP, that same CTPP may be providing different ICT services to its financial entity client base,
which in itself may not constitute a concentration risk at service level. It is proposed to take into
account this nuance when finalising the advice to the EC and in any subsequent delegated act.
Indicator 1.2
• Two respondents raised concerns on the application of the ‘total assets’ as a uniformed EU metric
for assessment. A respondent noted that making use of the AuM (net asset value) to assess the
relative weight of the financial entities using that ICT TPP would base the measurement on easily
available and reliable data. Another respondent noted that the valuation of AuM is complex and
this should be provided by the competent authorities. It was further noted that EU asset managers
may also manage assets in other non-EU jurisdictions or that services of an ICT TPP could cover
only part of the asset managers’ AUM. Another respondent noted that using AuM should only be
used by asset managers with a UCITS or AIF licence. For investment firms that also provide portfolio
management services at their own discretion, the total value of assets should be relevant across
the board. Otherwise, this could lead to delimitation problems for investment firms that also
perform other MiFID activities (such as dealing on own account).
• A respondent proposed to take a differentiated approach for the different types of financial
entities as well as differentiating asset classes.
• A respondent proposed to specify that the total assets of credit institutions should derived from
the ‘total assets’ on their audited balance sheets.
• A respondent noted the term “premium collected” is too generic for insurance undertakings and
proposed ‘gross written premiums’ instead as it would reflect better the European footprint.
• Three respondents mentioned there are no relevant equivalent metrics available and two
participants noted the complexity and complication of this metric. A respondent proposed to
consider the total number of customers of financial entities and the impact of the ICT TPP on the
55
critical or important functions (including for resolution purposes). Two respondents proposed as
alternative metrics the market share of financial entities (e.g. market capitalization, revenue, or
customer base) and profitability (e.g. profits or operating income). These could complement the
assessment based on total value of assets/total assets equivalent. Another respondent proposed
as equivalent metric to the indicator 1.2 the share of the revenues of financial entities using ICT
services provided by the same ICT TPP over the total revenues in the EU financial sector.
• A respondent raised concerns that any further differentiation would lead to more documentation
work for the financial entities without any tangible benefits. It is therefore proposed for the
indicators in step 1 to be kept as simple as possible acknowledging that these can only be an
approximate reference.
• Seven respondents found the proposed thresholds too low. Two participants suggested to
increase it to 20-25% as it is an appropriate inclusionary benchmark to use in assessing the systemic
nature. Another respondent proposes minimum 10% total or 20-25% per type of financial entity
as financial sub-sectors may be dominated by few big financial entities and thus the TPP of such
entities may then be encompassed solely based on this. A participant also proposed to use
absolute value instead of percentage as thresholds, given the latter is sensitive to
interdependencies.
• Two respondents proposed to lower the thresholds without making the list too long.
• Two respondents proposed a staged approach on the thresholds starting for example with 30%
for first 2 years and then decreased to 10% to focus the oversight scope of the ESAs in the first
years. This will allow time to the ESAs, TPPs and the financial entities to learn and improve.
• A respondent noted that reference values are required to assess whether the proposed 10%
threshold is appropriate. Another respondent suggested the performance of a dry run before
setting minimum thresholds as well as an explanation of the economic rationale behind the
proposed threshold (mentioned by two participants).
• A respondent noted that minimum thresholds should not be applied in a mechanistic manner
and the indicators should not be determinative. Flexibility should be in the process to enable a
holistic approach, including inviting the TPPs to respond/sense check step 1 findings before
proceeding with step 2.
Indicator 1.3
• Three respondents noted the need for further specification for assessing indicator 1.3 as it appears
highly subjective, including explanation on how the aggregated result across all financial entities
will be used as a reference value.
• A respondent noted that step 2 indicators (being of a qualitative nature) would be more
appropriate to identify systemic impact, since they consider the type of activity impacted by the
failure of the provider.
• A respondent noted that indicator 1.3 does not align with DORA Article 31(2)(a). Further, DORA
Article 31(2)(a) is limited to the impact on the stability, continuity or quality of the provision of
financial services. It does not extend to the impact on the services, activities and operations of
56
financial entities generally. Proposal for indicator 1.3 to be properly scoped and consistent with
the focus of DORA Article 31(2)(a).
• A respondent noted that business continuity plan and recovery procedures are confidential and
need to remain confidential, therefore this information should not be part of the indicators.
• A respondent noted that when a significant number of financial entities rely on ICT services from
the same ICT TPP, it signifies a shared risk exposure (for example, if an ICT TPP were to experience
a large-scale operational failure, it would affect multiple financial entities simultaneously).
However, this can be mitigated by financial entities by taking proactive measures such as
implementing backup systems, redundancy plans, and disaster recovery strategies. Six
participants highlighted that further guidance would be welcomed on the definition of "large-
scale operational failure" and "substantial negative impact". Proposal to refer only to critical or
important functions, to assess whether other EU financial can also be affected and whether these
as a whole are important for the European financial market.
• One participant proposed for indicator 1.3 to limit the impact of failure of the ICT TPP on the
provision of financial services by financial entities, and not on services, activities and operations
generally. The following adjustment is suggested to make indicator 1.3 more specific and relevant:
‘Share of financial entities for which a large-scale operational failure of the same ICT TPP to provide
its services would cause a substantial negative impact on the provision of financial services by
those financial entities’.
• A respondent suggested to link Indicator 1.3 with the substitutability of the provided ICT services
and whether back-up services, alternative ICT TPPs or data exist.
• A participant proposed to remove assessment of subcontractors as this would be inappropriately
burdensome with a view to indirect dependence. Sub-contractors should be limited to indicator
1.4.
• Another respondent proposed to distinguish between the operational failure of “the same ICT
TPP” and the operational failure of “a relevant service line of a given ICT TPP” as it can be rare
for an entire ICT TPP to fail.
Indicator 1.4
• Four respondents stressed that this indicator could be difficult to define and quite subjective.
Other than disaster recovery (DR) plans invoked, further guidance would be required for assessing
this and as it will be specific to individual financial entities, the impact will vary across markets.
Another respondent noted that a failure of an ICT TPP might not impact a financial entity if there
is a readily available alternative ICT TPP that can be activated immediately (e.g. a network
provider).
• Three respondents requested clarity on whether indicator 1.4 applies only to subcontractors of
CTPPs, who should provide this information, and noted that subcontractors of non-critical ICT TPPs
will not be taken into account potential cluster risks. Another respondent noted there is no clear
link between indicator 1.4 (step 2) and the designation process as well as the source of information
to assess this indicator.
57
• A respondent highlighted that further guidance is proposed to be provided on the proposed
actions or approaches to be considered in the event of a concentration of sub-contractors is
identified at EU level (e.g. substitutions of CTPPs).
• A respondent proposed for this indicator to have an appropriate “filtering” effect by focusing on
the business services (e.g. payments, liquidity management settlements and clearing) and the
market share of financial entities receiving ICT services from the same CTPP. Similarly, another
respondent proposed to consider subcontractors if they are providing a critical ICT service that
supports critical or important functions of financial entities.
• A participant proposed to include indicator 1.4 under criterion 3 as subcontractors related critical
and important functions is mentioned in DORA Article 31(2)(c).
• To ensure a risk-based approach, a respondent suggested to consider how a CTPP is using a
specific sub-contractor as two or more CTPPs may use the same subcontractor to provide
different services or a similar service in different locations.
• Four participants proposed that footnotes (9) and (10) should be listed directly in the text as they
contain relevant information.
• A respondent proposed to reconsider the extension of the criticality of an ICT TPP or subcontractor
to the entire group as it is not clear whether this includes all companies in a group, certain types
of companies in a group or only the companies in the oversight scope. In the case of a diversified
group, this could mean significant risks and increased implementation efforts (compliance with the
requirements).
• A respondent mentioned that the term “discontinuation” is quite vague hence the need for a
clearer definition to be able to assess its potential impact. For example, it would be helpful to
know whether the term covers suspension/interruption as well as cessation/termination.
• A respondent noted that the activation of a contingency plan is not considered an appropriate
input to identify the potential impact on the financial entities’ services, activities and operations.
• Two respondents proposed that all indicators should consider direct or indirect critical
subcontractors and take into account the whole supply chain.
• A participant proposed to explicitly define what qualifies as a subcontractor and further guidance
how to determine critical or important functions.
• A respondent requested clarity that subcontractors that belong to the same group as the CTPP
should be excluded when assessing this indicator, as these should be already considered in the
context of the CTPP’s group assessment.
Data sources
• Two respondents highlighted a need for clarity on the source(s) of information to assess the
systemic impact of a large-scale operational failure. It is further noted it would be disproportionate
to require financial entities to produce additional plans or documents to allow regulators perform
similar assessments hence such assessment should leverage on existing BCPs and recovery plans.
58
• Seven respondents proposed to use the registers.In particular, two respondents proposed this
data to include LEI codes of ICT TPPs, criticality assessment, description and categorisation of the
ICT services provided, critical functions supported, and subcontractors involved as well as to refer
to EU consolidated level.
• In relation to the total asset value, two respondents proposed to use existing regulatory reports
and another respondent further proposed the ESAs (i) to publish anonymised data of EU-wide
total value of assets (by class of financial entity) and (ii) require financial entities contracting with
ICT TPPs to provide data on their individual asset value for the purpose of DORA. This will enable
ICT firms to access to the data they require to assess their status under DORA.
• A respondent noted that this information needs to be compiled by the ESAs and come directly
from financial entities as ICT TPPs do not hold detailed information of the financial entities.
• Another respondent proposed to use data to be collected by the CTPPs after the first designation.
• A respondent proposed the following additional data sources: (i) industry reports or ad-hoc
assessments commissioned to firms with dedicated capabilities, market experts, and experience
(e.g. consultancy companies), (ii) self-reported data/surveys administered to ICT TPPs and
subcontractors, (iii) database of registered ICT TPPs, subcontractors, and financial entities, (iv)
entities (including TPPs) balance sheets.
• A participant highlighted that information of subcontractors should be provided by the identified
CTPPs.
• A respondent proposed to use the designation of ICT TPP as “essential and important entities”
under NIS2.
• A respondent mentioned that it would be useful to provide the formula for the calculation of the
different indicators as well as possible data sources for each indicator. Also clarity on who will
perform the calculations, the timeframe of the calculation and how subcontractors will be
considered in the calculation of the indicators.
Criterion 2 (Questions 12-17 in the discussion paper)
General comments
• Three respondents proposed to include the “criticality of the functions being supported by the
CTPPs/ nature of ICT services received/ degree of substitutability” in the criterion 2 indicators.
• Two respondents requested to clarify that criterion 2 mentioned in Article 31(2)(b) DORA
Regulation and the additional indicators are not relevant for investment firms regulated under
the IFD/IFR, nor for asset managers licenced under the UCITS or AIFM Directives either, that rely
on ICT third-party service providers.
• A respondent recommended to consider the principles of proportionality and subsidiarity as well
as the need to ensure a level playing field. Not all financiel entities in scope of the DORA should
be subject to the same reporting requirements and supervision by national competent authorities
59
should be encouraged as these authorities would have detailed knowledge of the specificities of
their respective national markets.
• A participant expressed agreement that the number of G-SIIs and O-SIIs could be a useful
indicator (indicator 2.1), but disagree with the assumption that scale necessarily leads to risk or
less resilience as the provider might have a wider net of experience and can rapidly apply lessons
learned to its entire ecosystem. It is therefore suggested extending this list to all providers to O-
SIIs and G-SIIs to allow supervisors to enter earlier into the qualitative assessment. G-SIIs and O-
SIIs may receive very different services from providers with very different risk profiles. Casting the
net wide and allowing supervisors to review service by service in a qualitative analysis will lead to
a better and fairer outcome.
• A respondent proposed that the 10% minimum relevance thresholds established in indicators
1.1, 1.2, 3.1, 4.1 and 4.2 should be applied across all financial entities in the EU rather than at a
country level given DORA is a Union wide piece of regulation and focussed on the risks to the EU
as a whole. This would allow for a gradual expansion over time if necessary.
• Another respondent requested more clarity on how the suggested thresholds have been chosen.
Additionally, proposal to include guidance on 1) what happens if thresholds are exceeded,
including what course of action is required to be taken, by financial entities, if any (up to and
including exiting of CTPP's if that is the expectation) and 2) how each of the indicators are weighted
and what course of action is expected for each one if thresholds are exceeded.
• A respondent highlighted that without further context or information, it is difficult to assess the
appropriateness of the thresholds. The thresholds should be set based on an understanding of
the potential risks and dependencies associated with the ICT TPPs and the financial entities using
their services.
• A respondent encouraged the ESAs to assess the significance of those criteria which are indicators
of systemic risk for the purposes of the holistic/collective assessment. As the other indicators listed
are more risk-based and outcomes focused, suggestion to assign criterion 2 indicators with a
lesser weighting.
• A participant noted that it would have been beneficial to provide more details, in particular with
regards to the formula behind the different indicators, possible data sources, assumptions made,
and the treatment of sub-contractors.
• A respondent expressed agreement on the fact that it is important to ensure that the critical sub-
contractors and vendors are covered by the assessment as well.
Indicator 2.1
• Four participants noted that indicators 2.1 and 2.2 refer to financial entities actively using ICT
services provided by the ICT TPP. However, it may be unclear how the usage is defined or
measured. Ambiguity may arise in determining whether active usage is based on contractual
arrangements, operational integration, or other factors, leading to inconsistencies in assessing the
criterion. Therefore, it is proposed that indicators 2.1 and 2.2 address “reliance” on ICT services
providers (as opposed to mere “use”).
60
• Two respondents requested a clarification of indicator 2.1 as it would be not clear if the minimum
relevance threshold should be interpreted as meaning that any ICT TPP of a G-SII would be
potentially critical or not. This might result in ICT TPPs refraining from entering into contracts with
G-SIIs. The same should be considered with regard to Indicator 2.2.
• A respondent proposed to merge indicators 2.1 and 2.2 for a more homogeneous evaluation and
in order to avoid exceptions.
• Another respondent proposed that specific guidance should be provided on how to assess the
impact or significance of G-SIIs and O-SIIs on the stability and integrity of the EU financial system.
Otherwise there would be a risk of ambiguity.
• A participant highlighted that the lists of G-SIIs and O-SIIs refer to credit institutions, therefore
excluding pension funds such as IORPs.
• A respondent proposed to consider that providing services to a single G-SII (indicator 2.1) should
not meet the minimum relevance threshold. Bearing in mind that there are around 30 G-SIIs.
Therefore it is recommended to lift this threshold to 3 G-SIIs which represents a more meaningful
market position. Likewise, it is recommended to lift the threshold from 3 O-SIIs to 5 O-SIIs
considering there are more than 170 O-SIIs, and to at least 3 O-SII with an O-SII score above 3,000.
Indicator 2.2
• Six respondents highlighted that the threshold of indicator 2.2 is too small. The threshold takes
effect if at least one systemically important non-credit institution is affected. This puts these
institutions on the same level as G-SIIs. Three participants noted that the same holds for the
threshold of indicator 2.1 as the current level is likely to include many small and non-critical
suppliers, which would make the step 2 assessment more extensive. One respondent
recommended to use absolute values instead of percentage thresholds, given the latter is sensitive
to interdependencies which can be difficult to measure.
• Five respondents expressed their view that the approach behind indicator 2.2 leaves too much
discretion in the hands of the competent authorities and may in fact create an uneven playing
field within the EU market, i.e. what may prove “systemic” at a national level, may not necessarily
be at an EU one. If the indicator is kept, it is suggested to provide more detailed information on
the term “supervisory expert judgement”.
• Two participants proposed with regards to indicator 2.2 to frame more tightly the rules around
the designation of a financial entity as “systemic” by competent authorities, i.e., it should be
made clear that only certain authorities (namely, the supervisory bodies of financial entities in
scope of the DORA) can designate a financial entity as “systemic”. In this context is should also be
clarified whether the term “systemic” is the only term accepted. A respondent highlighted that the
approach described for indicator 2.2 could lead to divergent approaches per regulator per
jurisdiction and might result in additional burdens for the designated entities.
• A respondent expressed the concern that for indicator 2.2 supervisory information which is not
publicly available or based on a clear set of criteria will be used.
61
Indicator 2.3
• Ten respondents expressed agreement with the fact that recording of interconnectedness is
complex in practice. For this reason, further guidance on this point should be included in the final
response to the Commission. Another respondent questioned the added value of an indicator 2.3
in general. Another participant proposed to specify the definitions of “interdependence” and
“connectedness” to facilitate identification of in scope arrangements and ensure consistency of
reporting. Another respondent noted that the data used could include data on financial
infrastructure services provided by G-SIIs or O-SIIs to other financial entities, as well as qualitative
information.
• Four respondents expressed their agreement with indicator 2.3.
• Two respondents had the remark that data for indicator 2.3 on the interdependences between
G-SIIs, O-SIIs and other financial entities could be available from existing regulatory disclosures,
depending on the interdependencies being sought. Before clarifying what is within scope,
recommendation to the ESAs to conduct further analysis on the data which is already available.
Furthermore, it is proposed to focus within step 2 on identifying the number of G-SIIs, O-SIIs and
other financial entities who are relying on the same ICT provider for critical/important functions,
as the key interdependency. Another respondent noted that such data can only come from
financial entities as ICT TPPs (such as cloud service providers) have limited visibility in the workload
of customers and therefore are unable to provide such data.
• Two participanted requested to clarify whether Article 394 of CRR in light of intra-bank business
is meant by indicator 2.3.
• Two respondents noted that links between pension funds and other types of financial entities
are limited.
• A respondent proposed to add to indicator 2.3 the “number and share of financial entities using
the same ICT TPPs”, the “concentration of ICT TPPs in the market”, and the “level of dependency
of the financial entity on a specific ICT TPP”, measured e.g. by the share of budget allocated to
the ICT TPP/ the share of ICT services assigned to the ICT TPP weighted by their stratregic
importance.
• A respondent proposed to specify indicator 2.3 by explicitly defining the parameters used to
determine “interdependence”, by providing guidance on how to measure the level of
interdependence, and by providing guidance on how to assess the potential impact of
interdependencies on the stability and integrity of the EU financial system.
• A respondent proposed for indicator 2.3 to have a reasonable chain of causation that is
demonstrably linked to established interdependence between financial entities. If an ICT TPP
provides completely different services to two different financial entities, the fact that those two
financial entities are interdependent, could be irrelevant if that dependency does not involve the
services provided by the ICT TPP. It could only be relevant if both financial entities rely on the same
service provided by the ICT TPP for the interdependent function. Therefore, indicator 2.3 can be
both overinclusive and underinclusive and a more granular approach to data collection would be
62
important. To fix this, it is suggested differentiating the assessment in a similar same way as
proposed for indicator 1.3.
Data sources
• Two respondents confirmed that the referenced G-SIIs and O-SIIs lists are accurate. Highlighted
that uniform assessment criteria are still needed in the EU for the survey of systemically important
“non-credit institutions” (indicator 2.2).
• Three respondents generally proposed to use already available data such as industry reports or
ad-hoc assessments commissioned to firms, surveys administered to ICT TPPs, interviews with
financial entities and experts for assessing interdependencies, a database of registered ICT TPPs
and G-SIIs and O-SIIs, and the balance sheets of financial entities and ICT TPPs. Another participant
proposed to leverage on data from competent authorities and supervisory bodies, including expert
judgement of relevant competent authorities.
• A participant recommended to use the registers that financial entities currently maintain under
the existing ESA outsourcing guidelines, and in particular the information about whether an ICT
service is considered critical or important to determine which ICT services financial entities rely on.
This would clarify the term “using ICT services”.
• A respondent suggested for banks and with regards to indicator 2.3 to use bank’s individual CCR
calculations as banks are required there to apply specific capital treatment to interbank exposures.
However, such data is not publicly available, which might create issues in practice.
• Two respondents noted that they are not aware of any relevant data sources.
Criterion 3 (Questions 18-22 in the discussion paper)
Indicator 3.1
• Eight respondents expressed agreement with the step 1 indicator proposed for criterion 3.
Another respondent proposed to introduce additional indicator that assesses the average number
of ICT services provided by an ICT TPP per financial entity as multiple financial entities relying on a
particular ICT TPP for a high number of ICT services implies that there is a strong dependency.
Another respondent suggested to limit “supporting” to ensure that only ICT TPPs that are providing
ICT services that may materially impact the critical or important function are in scope.
• Three respondents noted that indicators 3.1 and 1.2 are to a large extent duplicates.
• Nine respondents noted that the 10% minimum threshold for indicator 3.1 is too low. Four
respondents would appreciate evidence-based clarifications on how the 10% threshold was
determined. Another respondent proposed to raise the threshold to 30% until 2026 and then to
lower it to 10%. Another participant recommended to specify what happens if thresholds are
exceeded, including what course of action is required from financial entities, as well as on the
weighting of the indicators. Another respondent proposed to increase the threshold to 25%.
Finally, another respondent suggested to apply the minimum threshold flexibly.
63
• Two participants proposed to rethink the threshold for indicator 3.1 as the amount of assets has
no influence on the criterion. Instead, the threshold should refer to the number of critical and
essential business functions the ICT TPP is involved in. “Total value of assets” is not necessarily
representative of the importance of a financial entity. For this reason “total number of financial
entities” is preferred.
• A participant suggested to have 10% as the total threshold or 20-25% as the threshold per type
of financial entity. The same threshold should be implemented for indicator 1.2.
• A respondent proposed to lower the minimum threshold for indicator 3.1 and to use revenue (or
assets/ total assets-equivalent) rather than the number of financial entities.
• A respondent proposed for the second threshold of indicator 3.1 to take into account also the size
of a financial entity measured by the total value of assets or number of customers.
• Two respondents expressed concerns with applying the 10% minimum threshold for indicator 3.1
as some national pension sectors represent a large share of AuM of EU IORPs. Several national
pension fund service providers would hit this minimum threshold as a very limited number of
pension service providers provide ICT services to the pension sector. Thus, the proposed minimum
relevance thresholds would unnecessarily impact IORPs and related service providers. Therefore,
proposal to implement a more holistic assessment process.
• A respondent expressed its appreciation of the focus on ICT services that support critical or
important functions and relative levels of criticality in indicators 3.1 and 3.2.
• A participant suggested in order for the step 1 indicators to be practically implementable, to give
more clarity on what constitutes “critical or important functions”. The EBA Guidelines under
Section 4 provide a baseline to work from.
• A respondent recommended to use a predetermined list of critical functions in order to ensure
consistency in the process of identifying such.
• A respondent proposed for indicator 3.1 to distinguish between different service lines, financial
entities, and asset classes, as well as to target more specifically critical dependencies for
important business services. It may even be considered to assess market risks differently at
different levels of the market (e.g. large vs. medium vs. small financial institutions).
• A respondent requested to define “critical or important functions”. Remark that it would have
been beneficial to have written clear formulas for the indicators, to elaborate on possible data
sources that could be used for the calculations, to provide more details on the assumptions behind
the indicators, as well as to describe more clearly how you would consider sub-contractors in the
indicator calculations.
• A respondent highlighted that focusing on a risk-based approach similar to that applied for the
identification of critical service providers within the scope of non-financial risk management for
the management companies, proposal to consider that the assessment of critical functions
should be following a business impact analysis and a risk-based approach. Resultingly, no
appreciation of a taxonomy-based approach in the form of a list of critical activities, which
64
completeness and suitability could be questioned within the context of specific activities and / or
entities.
• A respondent noted that the denominator is the same across indicators 1.2, 3.1 and 4.1, and only
the numerator is changing capturing the reduced scope of entities for Indicator 3.1 (only for critical
function) and Indicator 4.1 (only for hardly substitutable services). Since the numerator of Indicator
3.1 and 4.1 is a subset of the one of Indicator 1.2 it appears inconsistent to have the same threshold
for all three. Indeed, overshooting any of the threshold for Indicator 3.1 and 4.1 will automatically
result in the threshold for Indicator 1.2 also being overshoot. It is therefore recommended to
calibrate the thresholds differently implying a larger number for Indicator 1.2 to avoid being
redundant with Indicator 3.1 and 4.1.
• A respondent proposed to distinguish between “criticality” and the “number of very critical
functions”.
• A respondent expressed its agreement with indicator 3.1, but highlighted that indicators 3.1 and
1.4 could be combined to include subcontracting and make reference to critical or important
functions only. Before subcontracting, it should be assessed to what extend financial entity can
and must keep data on subcontracting.
• A respondent mentioned that qualitative information on how mortar a financial entity is may
also be taken into account under criterion 3.
Indicator 3.2
• Eleven respondents suggested to define the term “taxonomy of ICT services” and the term “level
of criticality”. Another two respondents highlighted that a ‘taxonomy of ICT services’ should not
be developed at a later stage as it plays an instrumental role. A respondent noted that indicator
3.2 is considered the most important indicator of all that have been listed. Absent a clear definition
of Critical or Important function under the step 1 indicator, the proposed step 2 indicator risks
becoming the de facto assessment about criticality. General area of ambiguity could be the
subjectivity in assessing criticality in step 2 versus the quantitative indicators in step 1. A
respondent requested to refrain from further classification schemes and taxonomies as they see
the danger that this will lead to considerable efforts at the level of financial entities.
• Fire respondents agreed that indicator 3.2 would benefit from an indicative ICT services
taxonomy.
• Five participants expressed their agreement with the step 2 indicator proposed.
• Two respondents objected to the ranking of criticality and the creation of a distinct taxonomy
for indicator 3.2. A respondent proposed to leverage the ongoing work of the FSB on third-party
risk management, which seeks to introduce greater international harmonisation as to what
amounts as critical as well as on work done by the ECB and SRB. The EBA Guidelines on Outsourcing
Arrangements already require that financial institutions develop a methodology to identify critical
outsourcing contracts. Establishing a new stand-alone taxonomy of criticality for DORA, could
result in inconsistencies, and potentially a contract being deemed as critical under the EBA
Guidelines but not necessarily under the newly proposed DORA taxonomy. Another participant
65
proposed to build on the risk assessment framework already in place in the non-financial risk
management framework of each management company.
• Two respondents mentioned that the ESAs should be cautious on a future “ICT services
taxonomy”. A respondent highlighted that a service may be critical, or a region may be critical for
a particular financial entity, depending on how use of that service or region is implemented by a
specific financial entity.
• A respondent recommended to put more emphasis on the (critical) services. A better clarification
of what constitutes a “critical or important function” would help narrow the criticality
determination. In this context, it would be important to consider existing EU legislation (e.g. MiFID
II).
• A respondent proposed to develop another step 2 indicator that captures the situation where an
ICT TPP is active in only one type of service or in a wide range of IT services. Financial entities
may rely on the same ICT TPP for more than one service. While the potential impact of disruption
to any of the individual services might not necessarily pose systemic risks, a simultaneous failure
or disruption of all the services together might threaten the integrity of the financial system.
• A respondent recommended to add to indicator 3.2 “where these ICT services support critical or
important functions”.
• A respondent suggested for indicator 3.2 to distinguish between different service lines, financial
entities, and asset classes, as well as to target more specifically critical dependencies for
important business services. It may even be considered to assess market risks differently at
different levels of the market (e.g. large vs. medium vs. small financial institutions).
• A participant proposed to nuance the reference to “total value of assets of financial entities” by
referring to total value of assets of financial entities based in the EU.
• A respondent noted that subcontracting should only be included when it has been evaluated to
what extent financial entities can or must keep data on the subcontracting of ICT services.
Data sources
• A participant recommended to make use of existing outsourcing registers and the DORA-related
data collection exercise which have been conducted since October 2022, and subsequently the
Register of Information.
• Two respondents suggested to use for indicator 3.1 “Number of essential and critical business
functions of the financial entity”, “Number of service providers and types of ICT services that
have an impact on the business functions”, and for indicator 3.2 the ICT service taxonomy, if
available.
• Two respondents proposed to take into account “Industry reports or ad-hoc assessments
commissioned to firms or market experts”, “Survey administered to financial entities and ICT
TPPs”, “Database of registered ICT TPPs and financial entities”, “Work done by market research
firms”, “audit reports”, as well as the “Balance sheets of financial entities and ICT TPPs”.
66
• A participant recommended to use the registers that financial entities maintain under the
existing ESA outsourcing guidelines to determine which ICT services support critical or important
functions.
• A respondent noted that such information needs to be compiled by the ESAs and should directly
come from financial entities and ICT TPPs.
• A respondent proposed to measure ICT service criticality as a consequence of “operational
criticality” and “compliance criticality”.
• A respondent highlighted that in Italy there is an outsourcing supervisory reporting that could be
used.
Criterion 4 (Questions 23-27 in the discussion paper)
Indicator 4.1
• Four respondents agreed with indicator 4.1 , but highlighted its high level of complexity. Another
participant agreed with indicator 4.1 without any additional remark.
• Six respondents highlighted that indicator 4.1 might be considered subjective.
• Two respondents proposed to consider alternative providers on the market i.e. monopoly versus
oligopoly.
• Two respondents recommended to focus on ICT services that support critical or important
functions.
• A respondent proposed that the degree of substitutability can be measured by market
concentration and data portability. In particular, assessment could be made on the number and
concentration of TPPs that provide ICT services within the market. Proposal for concentration to
be assessed by taking into account the market share of a TPP in a market, in particular if a TPP
has at least 20% market share for a particular critical ICT service, then the market could be
considered as highly concentrated. In terms of the number of TPPs, a market with less than 3 TPPs
could be considered as concentrated for a particular ICT service. Similary, a market with more than
10 TPPs for a particular ICT service would not be considered as highly concentrated. In terms of
portability, if ICT services which present difficulty in porting data may be deemed critical if such
migration is either impossible or presents substantial time (e.g. more than 12 months) and
significant costs (e.g. 5% or more of the total IT budget of a financial entity) to switch to an
alternative TPP.
• A participant recommended to define what qualifies a provider as an alternative ICT TPP.
Furthermore, “ability and capacity” might be subject to interpretation (technical capabilities/
infrastructure/ expertise/ regulatory compliance etc.).
• A respondent suggested to focus indicators 4.1 and 4.2 on the substitutability of ICT services that
support critical or important functions. Furthermore, an assessment should be made on the
number and concentration of ICT TPPs that provide services that support critical or important
functions within the marketplace. Substitutable services should be applied in a tech-neutral way
67
and focus on the underlying functions of such service/ technology provided. Market concentration
by no less than 10 providers for a particular function would suggest the market is not highly
concentrated. Market concentration of no more than 3 providers would suggest such market is
concentrated for a particular function. If a firm has at least 20% market share for a particular critical
or important service, that would favor designation as a CTPP.
• A respondent proposed to evaluate indicator 4.1 in the broader context of different service
offerings and a specific approach may need to be taken based on the specific offering.
• A respondent expressed its objection on indicator 4.1 invoking that the degree of substitutability
is not arising from the DORA level 1 text.
Indicator 4.2
• Four respondents expressed their agreement with indicator 4.2 , but highlighting its high level of
complexity.
• Six respondents noted that for indicator 4.2 the term “Highly complex/difficult to migrate or
reintegrate ICT services” lacks clarity and is subjective. Another respondent proposed to
rethink/redraft it and include definitions for “alternative" and “complex / difficult”. Another two
participants suggested to consider a risk-based approach.
• Six respondents noted that in their view indicator 4.2 is subjective.
• Two respondents proposed to consider the time required to migrate or reintegrate ICT services
in order to allow for a comparison/benchmark of indicator 4.2.
• A respondent recommended to refer under indicator 4.2 to “highly complex” only and not to
“difficult”.
• A respondent suggested not to consider the value of assets (as it is not necessarily representing
risk) and suggestion to either rely on the number of supported firms only or to develop more
appropriate metrics for indicator 4.2.
• A respondent proposed to also consider risk assessment and exit plan analysis.
• A respondent expressed its objection on indicator 4.2 invoking that the degree of substitutability
is not arising from the DORA level 1 text.
Indicator 4.3
• Six respondents expressed their agreement with indicator 4.3.
• Eight participants expressed their objection on indicator 4.3 as according to the views of three
respondents it is unlikely to gather comparable data, according to the views of two respondents
capturing required data is complex and cumbersome, according to the views of four respondents
it is not representative as many providers offer a broad range of services and therefore could have
a significant market share in one area, while other providers may offer only one specific service
and are very dominant in this specific area, and according to the views of two respondents it is
sensitive information.
68
• Three respondents suggested to consider in the context of indicator 4.3 that it is important to
provide clear guidelines on how the total annual expenses or estimated costs and the total
number of financial entities are determined to ensure consistency in the calculation process.
• Two respondents noted that more clarity is needed on the expected origin of data (source) and
its actual availability for use. This also should consider practical and legal challenges.
• Two respondents proposed to use the “taxonomy of ICT services” mentioned in the context of
indicator 3.2 as the basis for the calculation under indicator 4.3.
• Two respondents recommended to consider ‘market density’ i.e. ’how many alternative service
providers provide similar products’ (within a list of pre-defined categories) as a an indicator of
market concentration risk.
• A participant suggested to consider the estimated annual turnover with each ICT service provider
as an appropriate indicator.
• A participant proposed not to use the term “market share” which has a specific meaning in
competition law and may therefore lead to confusion.
• A respondent highlighted the relevance of the market share information, but expressed concerns
on the lack of complete and reliable data.
• A respondent expressed some doubts about the relevance of indicator 4.3.
• A respondent expressed its preference for the publication of a mathematical formula underlying
indicator 4.3.
• A participant noted that a threshold is missing for indicator 4.3.
Data sources
• Two respondents suggested to use information from the registers of the financial entities. A
respondent highlighted that it should be restricted to services supporting critical or important
functions.
• Two respondents proposed to consider also general qualitative analysis on monopoly markets to
assess the “level of substitutability”. Important to gather data from multiple sources. For
indicator 4.3 cautious on the fact that market shares of ICT TPPs might be inflated.
• Two participants recommended to take into account “Industry reports or ad-hoc assessments
commissioned to firms or market experts”, “Survey administered to financial entities and ICT
TPPs”, “Database of registered ICT TPPs and financial entities”, “Work done by market research
firms”, “audit reports”, as well as the “Balance sheets of financial entities and ICT TPPs”.
• A respondent noted that given the fact that substitutability is one of the attributes within the
existing Outsourcing Registers, those should be the initial data souce for the ESAs to leverage.
• A respondent proposed that if needed, data of national competent authorities should be
leveraged.
69
• A respondent recommended to the ESAs to compile such information leveraging data coming
from financial entities as part of their ongoing exercise to identify ICT TPPs.
• A participant noted that self-reporting is institution-specific and may be biased, inaccurate, based
on outdated information, and/ or reflective of budgetary constraints. For this reason, verification
by an independent expert is required.
• A respondent noted that in Italy there is an outsourcing supervisory reporting that could be used.
70
Oversight fees
Scope of oversight expenditure (question 28 of the discussion paper)
• A respondent broadly agreed with the scope of the oversight activities but wanted clarification
on how the ESAs would approach third-country CTPPs (within the Union, or at firm’s relevant
jurisdictions) and how this would impact the oversight expenditures.
• Five respondents raised concerns about the way the oversight fees will be reflected in the
prices paid by financial entities to their ICT providers designated as CTPPs, and stressed the
need for transparency with regard to the oversight expenditure and fees determination. Some
of them also suggested to have a staged approach when bringing CTPPs under oversight to
limit the incurred expenditures, or to periodically review the impact of such fees on innovation
in the European market.
• A respondent stressed the need for proportionality and the fact fees collected from CTPPs
should not fund the oversight of the TPPs who use voluntary opt-in.
• Two repondents had a different opinion on the scope of the oversight fees and made
alternative proposal on specific issues: to clarify that the oversight fees will be limited to tasks
mentioned in Article 33 of the DORA or to exclude tasks unrelated to the conduct of oversight
itself from the oversight expenditures to be covered by the oversight fees (i.e. the assessment
of the CTPPs should not be covered).
• A respondent confirmed the proposal of the ESAs is comprehensive and covers various
aspects of oversight activities.
Applicable turnover (questions 29-34 of the discussion paper)
Determination of the applicable turnover of the CTPPs based on their certified audited accounts of the
year (n-2)
• Two respondents confirmed the timing is appropriate.
• A respondent proposed to use N-1 financial statements as the basis of the calculation to
ensure CTPPs can implement any required accounting changes before the requirements apply.
• A respondent raised concerns on the reference to the IFRS to prepare the applicable turnover,
for the third-country ICT providers that have to prepare their financial statements in
accordance with other GAAP/standards. In addition, it stressed that there might be instances
where these accounts may be subject to a statutory duty of confidentiality.
• A respondent suggested to take the financial statements based on an average of 3 years (n-2
till n-5).
• A respondent estimated the proposal of the ESAs does not appear to take into account the
heterogeneity and specificity of business models and legal structures as the potential CTPPs
may also be non-listed companies.
Applicable turnover: revenues generated by all services
71
• Four respondents proposed to define a list of ICT services (or made reference to the list of ICT
services developed by the ESAs), which would exclude B2C services or B2B services that have
limited / no application to, or impact on, the financial sector, of which revenues would be used
to determine the applicable turnover. One also explained the revenues generated by the
provision of such services would be available in the trial balance of the CTPPs which is audited
by auditors even though auditors do not provide certification/audit opinion on it.
• A respondent disagreed with the proposal of the ESAs, as to differentiate services would be
easy, while some services only may be subject to DORA and only some of them may be
considered as “critical” (without specifying what “critical” means in their answer). According
to this participant, the fact providers pay taxes inside the EU would facilitate the determination
and certification of their revenues for the services they think are relevant to determine the
applicable turnover.
• A respondent confirmed the proposal of the ESAs is reasonable as it would ensure that the
revenues of all relevant services provided by the ESAs would be taken into account.
Applicable turnover: revenues generated by the provision of services to European clients only
• Two respondents suggested entities could provide figures based on raw data on sales to EU
legal entities broken down by the product/services that they reasonably believe would be
deemed critical and the ESAs would assume that auditors would have performed the
necessary reviews. One of the respondent supporting this alternative confirmed it would not
be feasible to show the specific and exact traceability of those indicative numbers to the final
audited financials of the legal entity that made those sales.
• Two respondents highlighted the proposal of the ESAs would be disproportionate, especially
if the services provided to the EU financial entities are a relatively small part of the overall
revenues of the CTPPs, so it would lead to a higher revenue base than the inccured oversight
costs.
• A respondent suggested to focus on revenues from EU entities (which may not be limited to
revenues generated from EU customers, as such entities also provide services to clients in the
Middle East and Africa) which would be designated as critical for the provision of services to
clients in the EU. By doing so, they estimate it would be disproportionate to require dedicated
financial statements and any version of an IFRS audited revenue statement recognized in one
of the European Member States would suffice.
• A respondent suggested there should be a regional scoping, stressing that there are multiple
methodologies by which this could be achieved (without further specification).
• A respondent confimed accounts are allocated by nature of revenue and auditors do not
certify them by geographic distribution. But CTPPs already have a note with geographical split
contained in consolidated accounts under section “Geographical information” showing
revenues from material countries of operations (including relevant EU countries) and region
(e.g. rest of Europe) so certified revenues generated from European clients (without detailed
split per country or revenue type) in consolidated accounts may be presented.
72
• A respondent invited to clarify what does “European clients” mean.
• A respondent confirmed it is possible for designated CTPPs to provide the ESAs with audited
revenues generated by the provision of services to European clients only if CTPPs maintain
separate records or accounts for their European clients and have independent auditors who
certify the accuracy and origin of these revenues (following established auditing procedures
and maintaining proper documentation).
Applicable turnover: revenues generated by the provision of services to clients subject to the DORA
• Three respondents have confirmed CTPPs do not know if their clients are financial entities
subject to the DORA and proposed the financial entities should declare to their ICT providers
whether they are subject to the DORA. One of them suggested that if a CTPP can demonstrate
it had an on-boarding process for all services covered by DORA that identified the specific
customers and revenues and these were collected and taxed inside the EU, the ESAs should
consider this.
• Five respondents have indicated that CTPPs are unlikely to hav