Preparing for the DORA Oversight Framework:
CTPP Designation and Next Steps
Workshop with technology service providers - 14 May 2025
Disclaimer:Theseslidesareprovidedfortheconvenienceofparticipantstotheworkshoponlyandaimtogivehigh-levelindicationsconcerningtheoversightframework
forcriticalICT-thirdpartyserviceproviders.TheydonotintendtoreplaceorprovideacomprehensiveoverviewonDORAandrelateddelegatedandimplementingacts–
forwhichyoushouldconsulttheOfficialJournaloftheEU–anddonotrepresentanyfinalviewsoftheESAs.Inparticular,theseslidesproducenolegaleffectsandthe
ESAsacceptnoresponsibilityorliabilitywhatsoeverwithregardtotheinformationcontainedwithinthem
How to interact with us today: rules of engagement
• The workshop is organised in two parts:
1. A presentation by the ESAs providing an overview of the DORA oversight framework with a focus on the 2025 timeline and the
process to designate ICT third-party service providers as critical.
2. AQ&A session.
• To interact with us, you will have the possibility to submit your inputs by using the MS Teams’ Q&A extension:
– All inputs are moderated. The moderator will not accept submissions from individuals with incomplete names or those
containing offensive content, as well as inputs related to aspects of DORAnot covered during this event.
– You will have the possibility to upvote inputs submitted by other participants.
• The ESAs may:
– during the workshop, reply to your inputs in writing directly using the MS Teams’Q&Aextension or
– during the Q&Asession, ask the person who submitted inputs to raise his/her hand by using the “” button and take the floor
to present his/her input.
• Please keep your intervention to max. 2 minutes to allow others to share their views. Always indicate your name and organisation.
• Due to time constraints, we kindly ask for your understanding that not all contributors will have the opportunity to make an oral
intervention.
• Please refrain from raising your hand unless your name is called, as it will not be effective. Thank you for your cooperation.
2
Agenda
Opening speech by Petra Hielkema, chairperson EIOPA 10:00 – 10:15
Overview of the DORA oversight mandate 10:15 – 10:45
Overview of oversight activities 10:45 – 11:00
ESAs target operating model 11:00 – 11:15
Designation of critical ICT third-party service providers and first year of oversight 11:15 – 11:45
Overview of ESAs high-level expectations 11:45 – 12:00
Questions and Answers 12:00 – 13:00
3
The Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)
• DORAis applicable to all European Financial Entities from 17 Jan 2025.
• Context: DORAestablishes a comprehensive framework for digital operational resilience for financial entities (FEs) in the EU. This is
to address (i) dependencyof the financial sector on technology companies and (ii) cyber risks and other vulnerabilitiesof FEs.
• DORAharmonises the rules concerning ICT risk management and resilience for 20+ different types of financial entities (FEs)
DDOORRAA
4
II.. IICCTT rriisskk IIII.. IICCTT--rreellaatteedd IIIIII.. DDiiggiittaall IIVV.. IICCTT VV.. IInnffoorrmmaattiioonn
mmaannaaggeemmeenntt iinncciiddeennttss ooppeerraattiioonnaall TThhiirrdd--ppaarrttyy rriisskk SShhaarriinngg
rreessiilliieennccee tteessttiinngg mmaannaaggeemmeenntt
 Principles and  General  Basic testing  Management of  Exchange of
requirements requirements  Advanced testing ICT third-party information
on ICT risk  Classification & risk by FEs
and
management reporting of major
intelligence on
Focus of
framework ICT incidents and  Oversight
cyber threats
cyber threats today’s framework for
critical ICT
workshop
TPPs
4
Rationale of the DORA oversight framework
• Reliance on ICT third-party providers (TPPs) has been constantly rising in the financial
sector, and it has become essential for the provisioning of financial services.
– An ECB assessment on ICT outsourcing showed and increase of 2.1% of banks ICT outsourcing budget
between 2023 and 2024.
– There is a growing trend toward the concentration of ICT services and capabilities among a limited
number of TPPs, either as direct service providers or subcontractors. For example, more than 30% of
the ICT budgets of significant banks are allocated to just 10 providers.
– In case of disruption in the services posed by the most critical ICT providers, the entire financial sector
may suffer crisis that could hamper public trust and generate financial stability risks.
• DORA entrusts the three ESAs (EBA, EIOPA, ESMA) to oversee at Union level the most
critical TPPs for the Financial Entities (FEs) => the CTPPs.
– Previous regulatory framework (i.e. pre-DORA) did not provide supervisors with adequate tools to
quantify, qualify and redress the consequences of ICT risk occurring at CTPPs.
5
Scope of the DORA oversight mandate
• In scope: Designated CTPPs providing ICT services supporting critical or important functions
of European Union FEs in accordance with Article 31 of DORA and the Commission Delegated
Regulation on the criticality assessment.
• Out of scope: ICT TPPs already subject to EU-wide oversight frameworks in relation to Article
127 TFEU tasks (e.g. SWIFT, Euroclear, TARGET2, and other systemic important payment
systems); FEs providing ICT services to other FEs; ICT intra-group service providers; ICT TPPs
active in one member state only.
6
Objectives of the DORA oversight mandate
• DORA equips the ESAs with tools to monitor the activities and the risks that CTPPs may pose to
the financial sector. To do so, the ESAs will assess whether CTPPs have in place comprehensive, sound
and effective rules, procedures, mechanisms and arrangements to manage those risks.
• The conduct of oversight activities contributes to: (i) promote convergence and efficiency in relation
to supervisory approaches when addressing ICT third-party risk in the financial sector, and (ii)
strengthen the resilience of FEs relying on CTPPs for the provision of ICT services.
• Oversight activities aim at preserving the Union’s financial system stability and the integrity of the
internal market for financial services.
• Operationally, the objectives of the oversight framework are to:
– provide an assurance that CTPPs manage their risks effectively while continuing to support financial
entities with secure and resilient services;
– prevent the disruption of services, notably through attention to dependencies, concentration and
systemic risks, which could endanger the stability, continuity or quality of financial services in the EU.
7
The interplay between DORA oversight and the supervision of
financial entities’ ICT risks by competent authorities
• DORA oversight framework complements financial supervisors’ (Competent Authorities – CAs)
supervision of ICT risks.
• The framework is based on a cooperative model between CAs and the ESAs.
8
DORA oversight framework governance
• Existing forum for coordination of the three ESAs,
Joint Committee -JC including for designation and decisions concerning
CTPPs
• Report to the Co-legislators on ESAs’ oversight activities
Oversight Forum –OF • JC’s Sub-Committee for DORA oversight
• ESAs’ chairs and EDs • Draft joint positions and common acts for the 3 ESAs
• 1 representative of one CA of each MS (plus • Recommends TPPs to be designated as critical
observers from other CAs where appropriate)
• Provide a yearly assessment of the oversight activities
• 1 observer from EU COM, ECB, ESRB, ENISA
• 1 observer from the NIS2 CAs supervising CTPPs • Promotes a consistent approach for the monitoring of
ICT TPP risk, foster coordination for greater resilience
of FEs, reduce concentration and cross-sectors risks.
• Prepare JC yearly report to European authorities.
Joint Oversight Network -JON
• ESAs EDs, Joint Director of Oversight and ESAs HoDs • Monitors and steers the oversight work
Lead Overseers • ECB and ENISA can be invited as observers for technical advice
• Ensure consistent approach in oversight activities
• Coordination of oversight strategies and work
methodologies across ESAs
Joint Examination
Joint Examination
Joint Examination
conduct the oversight of Teams -JJoEiTnst Examination
Teams -JJoEiTnst JEoxianmt Einxaatmioinn ation
the assigned critical ICT Teams -JETs • JETs carry out oversight tasks (general investigations,
Teams -JETs
third-party service TeamTse -aJmETss -JETs inspections, others)
providers • ESAs staff
• Staff of DORA CAs
supervising FEs or where
CTPPs are established (VB)
• NIS2 CAs (voluntary basis VB)
9
Agenda
Opening speech by Petra Hielkema, chairperson EIOPA 10:00 – 10:15
Overview of the DORA oversight mandate 10:15 – 10:45
Overview of oversight activities 10:45 – 11:00
ESAs target operating model 11:00 – 11:15
Designation of critical ICT third-party service providers and first year of oversight 11:15 – 11:45
Overview of ESAs high-level expectations 11:45 – 12:00
Questions and Answers 12:00 – 13:00
10
DORA Oversight activities
11
Annual designation of CTPPs
1. Data Collection for the purposes of designation
2. Criticality assessment
3. (C)TPP notification
Designation
Process (Art.
4. Designation of CTPPs
31 of DORA,
Commission
Delegated 5. Appointment of a Lead Overseer (LO)
Regulation (EU)
2024/1502 and
Possibility for other TPPs to request to be designated as critical (“opt-in”)
RTS on
oversight
conduct)
12
Annual risk assessment & planning
The ESAs are developing a risk-based and proportionate Oversight Risk Assessment Process (ORAP) to:
– Identify the CTPP risk profile based on an assessment of the CTPP-specific and transversal risks, and the
controls in place;
Risk
Assessment – Determine the oversight priorities and the level of oversight intensity
Main source of information for the risk assessment are the past year’s examination activities, but other
sources may also be used (outcome of FEs’ supervision, incident reports, information from CTPPs)
On the basis of the results of the risk assessment, the ESAs will:
– Adopt a clear, detailed and reasoned individual oversight plan describing the annual oversight
objectives/priorities, the oversight activities planned for each CTPP and the envisaged timeline.
Oversight
The draft annual oversight plan is to be communicated to the CTPP.
planning
– Prepare and update annually a multi-annual strategic oversight plan for all CTPPs.
13
Examinations and ongoing regular monitoring
Examinations are organized in accordance with the oversight plan
The aim is to ensure that each CTPP has appropriate and effective mechanisms and procedures in
place for managing the risks it poses to FEs
Examination tools – general investigations, onsite inspections, ongoing regular monitoring. These can be of
Examinations
different levels of intensity.
• Ongoing regular
Main risk areas of focus – general risk and technology-related risks
monitoring
• Requests for
Information (RfIs) 1. Ongoing monitoring
(review of periodic information, ongoing interactions, emerging issues)
• General
Investigations
2. Requests for information 3. General investigations 4. On-site inspections
• On-site Inspections
(clarify a particular situation) (horizontal or targeted reviews (on-site review for
and
into particular risk areas) further intrusiveness)
• Reports on Remedial
Plans • Simple request • Thematic (horizontal) investigation • Detailed assessment
(Article 35, 37-39 of
• Request by Decision • Targeted investigation • Site review
DORA and RTS on
oversight conduct) • Follow-up on remediation plans • Tests of data/solutions
14
Focus: Recommendations and follow up
1. Recommendations
• Based on outcome of oversight examinations (e.g. on security/quality
issues, subcontracting, terms & conditions for use of ICT services)
• Communicated to the CTPP
Recommendations
• CTPPs expected to formally notify the overseers on their intention to
and Follow-ups
follow the recommendations
• The overseers issue
recommendations
linked to specific
2. Follow-up
findings from the
examinations. • CTPP accepts or objects (with reasoning) recommendation within 60
• Follow-ups are days
performed by
• Possible public disclosure if the CTPP does not notify the LO or provides
overseers and CAs.
insufficient reasoning
• CAs inform FEs using the CTPP of the risks, and take supervisory actions
• ESAs may issue non-binding and non-public opinions to CAs where the
CTPP refuse to endorse the recommendation and poses risks
15
Agenda
Opening speech by Petra Hielkema, chairperson EIOPA 10:00 – 10:15
Overview of the DORA oversight mandate 10:15 – 10:45
Overview of oversight activities 10:45 – 11:00
ESAs target operating model 11:00 – 11:15
Designation of critical ICT third-party service providers and first year of oversight 11:15 – 11:45
Overview of ESAs high-level expectations 11:45 – 12:00
Questions and Answers 12:00 – 13:00
16
ESAs organisation – Target Operating Model
IIlllluussttrraattiivvee
ESAs Target 3 ESAs staff operate under ‘one DORA Oversight team’ led
DORA Joint
Operating by a Joint Oversight Director
Oversight Director
Model (TOM)
Sectorial neutral approach – same risks Unit 1 Unit 2 Unit 3
Clear and stable organisation (efficiency, capacity build up,
JET JET JET
culture)
Matrix model: JETs are grouped in ESAs units, organised
JET JET JET
along the technology domains
JET JET JET
Specialisation of JETs based on CTPPs’ ICT services (e.g.
cloud, hardware, consulting, data services) – relevant skills
required
… … …
Partnership and strong collaboration with CAs (through JET
and governance structures participation)
17
ESAs organisation – the joint examination teams
• The JETs conduct operationally all oversight tasks (off-site and on-site activities) and are the teams interacting on an ongoing
basis with the CTPPs.
• The JET is established by DORA Article 40 “When conducting oversight activities [..] the LO shall be assisted by a JET established for
each critical ICT third-party service provider. […] The JET shall work under the coordination of a designated LO staff member (the ‘LO
coordinator’)”
• The JET works as a single team and every staff member part of the JET works under the coordination of the ESAs.
• The JET is composed by staff members with expertise in ICT matters nominated, according to criteria concerning their skills, by
the following authorities:
– The ESAs;
– The CAs supervising FEs making use of the ICT services provided by CTPPs;
– On a voluntary basis, the CA where the CTPP is established;
– On a voluntary basis, the competent authority designated or established in accordance with NIS 2 responsible for the
supervision of the CTPP.
18
Agenda
Opening speech by Petra Hielkema, chairperson EIOPA 10:00 – 10:15
Overview of the DORA oversight mandate 10:15 – 10:45
Overview of oversight activities 10:45 – 11:00
ESAs target operating model 11:00 – 11:15
Designation of critical ICT third-party service providers and first year of oversight 11:15 – 11:45
Overview of ESAs high-level expectations 11:45 – 12:00
Questions and Answers 12:00 – 13:00
19
First year of the CTPPs oversight – envisaged roadmap
PREPARATION EXECUTION OF OVERSIGHT TASKS
First designation and engagements with
Preparation JETs kick off and full engagement with CTPPs
CTPPs (oversight kick-off)
Q1/2025 Q2/2025 Q3/2025 Q4/2025 Q1/2026 Q2/2026 Q3/2026 Q4/2026
Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2025 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026 2026
Establishment of the DORA
OVS structures (OF, JON)
Methodologies & procedures
IT tools: CTPP designation Oversight collaboration
EExxppeecctteedd ppaayymmeenntt ooff EExxppeecctteedd ppaayymmeenntt ooff
ffeeeess ffoorr ‘‘2255 ttoo EESSAAss ffeeeess ffoorr ‘‘2266 ttoo EESSAAss
Pre-engagement with TPPs Engagement potential CTPPs
CTPPs designation
CTPPs direct engagement
DORA Direct Oversight is fully operational: risk
66--wweeeekk ppeerriioodd
assessment & planning, examinations, recommendations &
ffoorr CCTTPPPP’’ss
follow-up
rreeaassoonneedd Establishment
ssttaatteemmeenntt of the JETs
20
CTPPs designation: Process overview
CTPP designation process CTPP designation milestones in 2025
1. Data Collection for the purposes of designation
• FEssubmittheirRegisterofInformation(RoIs)toCAs Collection of •April –May
(including
• CAssubmittheRoIstotheESAs data
resubmissions)
2. Criticality assessment
• Criticality assessment ran based on DORA and EC Delegated Regulation
criteria Criticality
•June-July
assessment
3. (C)TPP notification
• TPPsinformedabout outcomeoftheassessment
• 6-weekperiod forTPPspossibility tosubmita“reasoned statement”
Notification
of potential •July
4. Designation of CTPPs
CTPPs
• Assessment ofinformationfromCTPPs
• BoSs decisionondesignation ofeachCTPP(followingrecommendation byOF)
• FinallistofCTPPspublished 6 weeks
•August –early
reasoned
5. Appointment of a Lead Overseer (LO) September
statement
• Appointment LO – done bythe BoS based on the FEs having the largest share
oftotalassetsamongstthetotalvalueofassetsofallCTPP’sclients
Possibility for other TPPs to request to be designated as critical Final •October -
designation November
(“opt-in”)
• TPPs not designated as critical request to be designated providing the
informationasrequired intheRTSonoversightconduct.
21
CTPPs designation: Data collection and data preparation
• As part of the data collection and the data preparation, the ESAs perform the following tasks:
• Provide data quality feedback to the submitting CAs on individual file basis  this requires
interaction of the CAs with the FEs to resolve the issues
• Process the resubmissions from the CAs of the RoIs with data quality issues (several
rounds are possible until the data freezing)
• Prepare the data for the analysis, including resolving duplicate records and grouping of the
ICT TPPs, where relevant, in accordance with their legal groups  According to Article
31(3) of DORA, the criticality assessment is performed at the level of the groups of ICT
TPPs, where those belong to groups
22
CTPPs designation: Criticality Assessment overview
According to Article 31 of DORA, the criticality assessment is based on four broad criteria:
a) the systemic impact on the stability, continuity or quality of the provision of financial services in the event
that the relevant ICT TPP would face a large-scale operational failure to provide its services;
b) the systemic character or importance of the FEs that rely on the relevant ICT TPP;
c) the reliance of FEs on the services provided by the relevant ICT TPP in relation to critical or important
functions of FEs that ultimately involve the same ICT TPP; and
d) the degree of substitutability of the ICT TPP.
The four L1 criteria are assessed using 11 sub-criteria following a two-steps process as mandated by the EC Delegated
Regulation on criticality assessment. (elaborated on next slide)
23
CTPPs designation: criticality assessment
SStteepp 11 QQuuaannttiittaattiivvee ((aauuttoommaattiicc)) aasssseessssmmeenntt ooff ssiixx ccrriittiiccaalliittyy ssuubb--ccrriitteerriiaa
Sub-criterion 1.1 Sub-criterion 1.2 Sub-criterion 2.1 Sub-criterion 2.2 Sub-criterion 4.1 Sub-criterion 4.2
TPP provides ICT TPP provides ICT TPP provides ICT TPP provides ICT services No alternative TPP Highly complex /
services to 10% or more services to 10% or more services to at least 1 G- to at least 1 central identified by 10% or difficult to migrate ICT
of FEs (based on number of FEs (based on total SIIor atleast 3 O-SIIsor securities depository, moreof the FEs (based TPP identified by 10% or
of FEs and by categories assets of FEs and by at least 1 O-SII with an O- central counterparty, on share of total number moreof FEs (based on
of FEs) which support categories of FEs) which SII score above 3,000. trading venue or trade and by categories of share of total number
critical and important support C&I functions repositoryor to at least 3 FEs) for ICT services and by FEs categories)
(C&I) functions FEsidentified as supporting C&I functions when these support C&I
’systemic’ by CAs*
functions
 TPPs fulfilling Step 1 (excluding entities outside the scope of DORA oversight) will be evaluated considering Step 2 indicators
SStteepp 22 QQuuaalliittaattiivvee ((eexxppeerrtt gguuiiddeedd)) aasssseessssmmeenntt ooffffiivvee aaddddiittiioonnaall ssuubb--ccrriitteerriiaa
Sub-criterion 1.3 Sub-criterion 2.3 Sub-criterion 3.1 Sub-criterion 4.3 Sub-criterion 1.4
Intensity of the impact of Interdependence between G- Level of criticality of ICT (Article 5(5) of EC Delegated Dependence of CTPPs on the
discontinuing the ICT services SIIs or O-SIIs and other FEs services provided to financial Regulation) same subcontractors
provided by the ICT third- using ICT services provided entities by the TPP Level of substitutability of ICT providing ICT services to FEs
party service provider on the by the same TPP services offered by the TPP supporting C&I functions
activities and operations of
financial entities
 TPPs fulfilling Step 1 and 2 will be part of the list of potential CTPPs
24
CTPPs designation: Reasoned statement & the ESAs decision
on CTPPs designation
After the criticality assessment is completed and the ESAs have identified potential CTPPs, the following process will start:
– By End of July 2025, potential CTPPs will receive individual letters from the ESAs notifying about the outcome of the
assessment
– From the date of notification, the ICT TPPs will have 6 weeks where they may submit to the ESAs a reasoned statement on
the assessment leading to the designation in case of object with their designation
– The ESAs will consider the reasoned statement and may request additional information to be submitted within 30
calendar days of the receipt of such statement
– In October-November 2025 the ESAs will prepare their decision regarding the CTPP designation and send them
individually to each CTPP
– When all individual decision letters are submitted to CTPPs, the ESAs will publish the list of CTPPs on their website
– Once the list is published, the ESAs will start their interactions with the CTPPs with the first objective to develop a
comprehensive understanding of the business model and the risks of the CTPPs
25
Oversight fees: first year (2025)
• The DORA oversight activities of the ESAs and the CAs involved are funded by CTPPs’ fees (full costs).
• For the first calendar year (2025), the oversight fees will be equally split among the CTPPs, based on the following
calculation:
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠
𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑠 =
𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐶𝑇𝑃𝑃𝑠
• Then, for the following years, the oversight fees paid by the CTPPs already designated in the previous years will be
calculated this way:
• In case TPPs not included in the list of CTPPs published by the ESAs submit a request to be designated as critical (only once the list of
CTPPs is published), they will be subject to a non-refundable opt-in fee of EUR 50,000. In case they would be designated as CTPPs
at the end of the analysis (not before 2026), they would then pay an oversight fee considering a time coefficient.
26
Agenda
Opening speech by Petra Hielkema, chairperson EIOPA 10:00 – 10:15
Overview of the DORA oversight mandate 10:15 – 10:45
Overview of oversight activities 10:45 – 11:00
ESAs target operating model 11:00 – 11:15
Designation of critical ICT third-party service providers and first year of oversight 11:15 – 11:45
Overview of high-level expectations 11:45 – 12:00
Questions and Answers 12:00 – 13:00
27
Principles for a constructive oversight engagement
Open engagement channels Foster constructive dialogue Build trust
The ESAs are committed to conduct oversight activities transparently and constructively, fostering trust among
CTPPs, financial entities, Competent Authorities, and stakeholders across the EU financial ecosystem. They are taking
the protection of the security of CTPPs data at the heart of their practice.
28
Initiating proactive engagement with providers
Engage with
various
Identify key Understand
functions,
points of providers’
including
contact of organisation
regulatory,
providers and governance
engineering and
security teams
• Know Point of Contact • Group’s structure and • Roles and responsibilities
responsible/team, role and governance for the different services
responsibility • Roles and responsibilities and functions
• CTPP’s presence in the EU, for the engineering,
establishment of a operations, provision of
subsidiary services to FEs in Europe
29
Expectations regarding the CTPPs establishment in the EU
• Ongoing dialogue and coordination. ESAs to establish a continuous dialogue with CTPPs, which need to be properly organised to
deal with the expected multiple requests coming from the assigned joint examination teams.
• Legal entity requirements. DORA introduces specific requirements for EU and non-EU CTPPs regarding the establishment of legal
persons and subsidiaries as contact points for the ESAs.
• Coordination through an EU-subsidiary. The ESAs expect that both EU and non-EU CTPPs identify an EU-subsidiary within their
group to coordinate the oversight activities across the group (EU or non-EU entities). The subsidiary should have:
• Access to information. The capacity to provide the ESAs with information on the services provided to EU FEs
• Operational and technical resources. the authority, the technical capacity, the relevant equipment, business premises and
financial resources to pull any type of relevant information and staff to address the request of the ESAs;
• Financial resources. A structure to provide financial data for the calculation of the oversight fees; access to financial resources for
fee payment and any applicable periodic penalty payment.
• Skilled and senior employees. Enough skilled employees able to engage with the ESAs (at different level of seniority) both during
examinations and in the follow up of recommendations;
• Empowered management. Senior leadership with authority to commit the CTPP in relation to the oversight activities and to which
escalation can be made;
• Onsite examination readiness. ability to cooperate with the JETs for on-site inspection including having sufficient office spaces to
welcome JET for onsite inspections.
30
Questions / Discussion
31