Consultation Paper
On Draft Implementing Technical Standards to establish the
templates composing the register of information in relation to all
contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT
third-party service providers as mandated by Regulation (EU)
2022/2554
1
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS ............................................................................................................................................... 3
1. RESPONDING TO THIS CONSULTATION ............................................................................................................... 4
2. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................... 5
3. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ........................................................................................................................ 7
4. NEXT STEPS ................................................................................................................................................. 19
5. DRAFT IMPLEMENTING TECHNICAL STANDARDS ................................................................................................ 20
6. DRAFT COST- BENEFIT ANALYSIS / IMPACT ASSESSMENT .................................................................................... 12
6.1 DRAFT COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS / IMPACT ASSESSMENT ............................................................................................ 12
OVERVIEW OF QUESTIONS FOR CONSULTATION ............................................................................................................ 26
2
Abbreviations
CP Consultation Paper
DORA Digital Operational Resilience Act
EBA European Banking Authority
EIOPA European Insurance and Occupational
Pensions Authority
ESMA European Securities and Markets Authority
ESAs European Supervisory Authorities
EU European Union
ICT Information and Communication Technology
ICT TPP ICT third-party service provider
JC Joint Committee of the ESAs
NCA National Competent Authority
IA Impact assessment
3
1. Responding to this Consultation
The ESAs invite comments on all proposals put forward in this paper and in particular on the specific
questions summarised in Paragraph 6.2.
Comments are most helpful if they:
▪ respond to the question stated;
▪ indicate the specific point to which a comment relates;
▪ contain a clear rationale;
▪ provide evidence to support the views expressed/ rationale proposed; and
▪ describe any alternative regulatory choices the ESAs should consider.
Submission of responses
To submit your comments, click on the ‘send your comments’ button on the consultation page by
11.09.2023. Please note that comments submitted after this deadline, or submitted via other means
may not be processed.
Publication of responses
All contributions received will be published following the close of the consultation, unless you request
otherwise. Please clearly and prominently indicate in your submission any part you do not wish to be
publicly disclosed. A standard confidentiality statement in an email message will not be treated as a
request for non-disclosure. A confidential response may be requested from us in accordance with the
ESAs’ rules on access to documents. We may consult you if we receive such a request. Any decision we
make not to disclose the response is reviewable by ESAs’ Boards of Appeal and the European
Ombudsman.
Data protection
The protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the ESAs is based on
Regulation (EU) 1725/2018 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018. Further
information on data protection can be found under the Legal notice section of EBA, EIOPA and ESMA
websites respectively.
4
2. Executive Summary
One of the objectives of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 on digital operational resilience for the financial
sector (“DORA”) is to ensure a sound monitoring of ICT third-party risk in the financial sector. The
conduct of such monitoring should follow a strategic approach to ICT third-party risk formalised
through a dedicated ICT third-party risk strategy adopted by the financial entities’ (FEs’) management
bodies, rooted in a continuous screening of all ICT third-party dependencies.
In light of the above and considering the need to enhance supervisory awareness and enable effective
supervision of FEs’ ICT third-party dependencies by Competent Authorities (CAs), and with a view to
further supporting the work in the context of the Oversight Framework established by the DORA,
according to Article 28(3) all FEs are required to maintain and update at entity level, at sub-
consolidated and consolidated levels, a register of information in relation to all contractual
arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT Third Party Service Providers (ICT TPPs).
Article 28(9) of the DORA mandates the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) to develop draft
implementing technical standards to establish the standard templates for the purposes of the register
of information, including information that is common to all contractual arrangements on the use of
ICT services.
In fulfilment of the mandate, the draft ITS presented in this consultation paper (CP) includes the
templates of the register of information which are designed to achieve all the three purposes as
described in the first two paragraphs above. Although the ITS does not contain specifications regarding
the process of sharing information from FEs to CAs and from CAs to the Oversight Forum1, the
templates and the requirements of their data points have been designed considering a data
management and reporting perspective to ensure consistency and harmonisation by design and avoid
burdensome reprocessing of data for reporting purposes.
Furthermore, and with specific reference to the first key purpose mentioned above (FEs’ ICT and third-
party risk management), the register of information aims at ensuring a minimum level of content and
harmonisation. It is expected that FEs complement the information required by the templates included
in the draft ITS by tailoring them to their internal and individual risk management purposes.
The set of templates composing the register of information are proportionate by design since the
quantity of information to be included depends on the the extent of dependency on services provided
by ICT third-party service providers. Therefore, a FE relying on a significant number of ICT third-party
service providers has more information to report in the register of information than a FE depending
on a small number or ICT third-party service providers.
1 Following article 32 of the DORA on the Oversight Forum.
5
For proportionality purposes, FEs are required to report certain additional information such as
complementary information about the risk assessment, the ICT supply chain or about the involvement
of suboutsourcers only if the ICT service provided supports a critical or important function.
The development of the templates included in the draft ITS has been performed leveraging on current
practices relating to outsourcing supervision of several CAs, and the templates are based on lessons
learned from previous data collection exercises carried out by CAs and the ESAs.
6
3. Background and rationale
1. Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 (“DORA”) requires financial entities (FEs), as part of their
ICT risk management framework, to maintain and update at entity level, at sub-consolidated and
consolidated levels, a register of information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use
of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers. FEs shall also make available to the
competent authorities (CAs) the register of information along with any information deemed
necessary to enable the effective supervision of FEs and for acquiring a broader understanding of
the ICT dependencies of FEs with a view to support the Oversight Framework of critical ICT third-
party service providers.
2. In this regard, Article 28(9) mandates the ESAs to develop draft implementing technical standards
(ITS) to establish the standard templates for the purposes of the register of information, including
information that is common to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services.
3. The following chapter sets out how the ESAs are proposing to fulfill this mandate and the key
underlying reasoning and considerations taken into account when developing the templates
constituting it. In addition, the Impact Assessment (IA) section at the end of the Consultation Paper
(CP) provides additional choices and options that have been considered by the ESAs when
developing this mandate.
4. In order to fullfill the purpose of the register of information outlined in paragraph 1, the templates
included in the draft ITS aim to:
a. capture minimum and necessary information concerning the contractual
arrangements and the assessment of the related risks stemming from them for FEs;
b. capture the ICT service supply chain with a focus on subcontractors of ICT services
supporting a critical or important function or material parts thereof (‘material
subcontractors’);
c. identify unambiguously and consistently the ICT third-party service providers and the
FEs by using the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) code2 to enable an efficient aggregation of
relevant information;
d. identify the (critical or important) functions supported by the ICT services provided by
ICT third-party service providers following the steps listed below
i. FEs to identify all their operational and business functions;
ii. FEs to identify which functions are critical or important according to their
internal assessment considering the definition in Article 3(22) of the DORA;
2 The draft ITS sets the requirement for all the financial entities and the ICT third-party service providers that are legal persons
to procure and maintain for themselves a valid LEI.
7
iii. FEs to identify the ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers
supporting the functions, (not only the critical or important functions)
iv. In case of groups, there is the additional need to capture the following links:
1. contracts between entities within the group only (internal contracts)
2. contracts between an entity within the group and an external ICT
third-party service provider (external contracts)
5. When it comes to groups, Article 2 of DORA makes reference to the Accounting Directive
(Directive 2013/34/EU) to define the meaning of a ‘group’, a ‘parent undertaking’ and a
‘subsidiary’. However, it is silent on how the FEs shall define the perimeter of sub-consolidation
and the entities to be included in the scope of both sub-consolidation and consolidation,
considering the practices stemming from the different financial regulations. In order to address
these points, the draft ITS contains the principles to be followed by the parent undertaking of a
group while defining the scope and the level of sub-consolidation.
6. The register of information is composed of a set of open tables, all linked to each other by using
different specific keys in order to form a relational structure. In order to ensure clarity, the draft
ITS proposes two sets of templates: one to be used at entity level and another one to be used at
sub-consolidated and consolidated level.
8
Register of information at entity level
7. The scope of the contractual arrangements to be included in the register of information at entity
level are the contractual arrangements that cover functions of which the financial entity makes
use of.
8. The register of information at entity level is composed of 10 templates. Illustration 1 shows the
relational structure between the templates highlighting the relational keys used to link one
template to another.
Illustration 1: Structure of the Register of Information maintained and updated at entity level
The 4 white-colored templates are designed only for the register of information at sub-consolidated
and consolidated level for reconciliation purposes.
9. As illustration 1 above shows, all templates (except for templates RT.01.01 and RT.99.01 being
more technical templates) are linked to each other by using relational keys. The keys used are
the following ones: (i) the contract reference number; (ii) the ICT third-party service provider
identifier; (iii) the function identifier and (iv) the ICT service identifier.
The keys are represented by coloured circles in the illustration above. The color code of the
circles matches the one of the templates where the relational keys are defined. For example, the
relational key “contract reference number” is defined in templates RT.02.01. Furthermore,
illustration 1 shows the presence of the different relational keys in the various templates. For
example, the relational key ‘contract reference number’ is used to link the information of
templates RT.02.01, RT.02.02, RT.05.02, RT.05.03 and RT.08.01.
9
Table 1: Objectives of the templates of the register of Information at entity level
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.01.01 Financial Entity Objective of this template is to identify the financial
maintaining the entity maintaining the register of information at entity
register of level.
information
RT.02.01 Contractual Objective of this template is to list all contractual
Arrangements – arrangements between the financial entity and its direct
General Information ICT third party service providers.
For each contractual arrangement between the financial
entity and the direct ICT third party service provider, the
financial entity shall assign a unique ‘contractual
arrangement reference number’ to identify
unambiguously the contractual arrangement itself.
RT.02.02 Contractual Objective of this template is to provide details in relation
Arrangements – to each contractual arrangement listed in template
specific information RT.02.01 with regard to:
(i) the ICT services included in the scope of the
arrangement;
(ii) the functions of the financial entities
supported by those ICT services;
(iii) other important information in relation to the
specific ICT services provided (e.g. notice
period, law governing the arrangement, etc.).
This template will enable ESAs and CAs to further
understand the features of the service provision subject to
the reported contractual arrangements.
RT.05.01 ICT third-party Objective of this template is to list and provide general
service providers information to enable the identification of:
(i) the direct ICT third-party service providers;
(ii) the subcontractors.
RT.05.02 ICT service supply Objective of this template is to identify and link one to
chains another the ICT third-party service providers that are part
of one ICT service supply chain3.
3 The ICT service supply chain shall link the ICT service providers (including intragroup service providers) as well as
subcontractors supporting a critical or important function or material parts thereof.
10
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
Financial entities shall identify and rank the ICT third-party
service providers for each ICT service included in the scope
of each contractual arrangement.
Example: a financial entity has a contractual arrangement
with an ICT third-party service provider (say, ICT third-
party service provider X) to receive two specific ICT
services (say ICT service A and ICT service B) and the
service provider makes use of a subcontractor (say, ICT
third-party service provider Y) to provide one of these
services (say ICT service B).
▪ In relation to ICT service A, the ICT service supply chain
is composed of one ICT third-party service provider,
ICT third-party service provider X, which will be given
‘rank’ 1 in the template. ICT third-party service
provider X is the direct ICT third-party service
provider.
▪ In relation to ICT service B, the ICT service supply chain
is composed of two ICT third-party service providers:
(i) ICT third-party service provider X, which
will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the template. ICT
third-party service provider X is the direct
ICT third-party service provider.
(ii) ICT third-party service provider Y, which
will be given ‘rank’ 2 in the template. ICT
third-party service provider Y is a
subcontractor.
RT.05.03 Alternative ICT third- Objective of this template is to request financial entity to
party service report basic information on the ICT third-party service
providers provider(s) identified as alternative provider(s), either
already under contract or only considered by the
financial entity.
In case the direct ICT third-party service provider is an ICT
intra-group service provider, financial entities shall not
report ‘alternative direct ICT third-party service
providers’.
RT.06.01 Functions Objective of this template is to identify and provide
identification information on the functions of the financial entity.
Within the information to be provided within this
template, financial entities shall include a unique
identifier, the ‘function identifier’ for each combination
of licenced activity and function.
11
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
Example: a financial entity which operates under two
licensed activities (say, activity A and activity B) will
identify two unique ‘function identifiers’ for the same
function Y (e.g. Sales) performed for activity A and
activity B.
RT.07.01 ICT services Objective of this template is to identify the ICT services
identification provided by ICT third-party service providers to the
financial entity through the creation of a ‘ICT service
identifier’.
RT.08.01 Assessments of the Objective of this template is to capture several
ICT services information in relation to the assessment on the ICT
services performed by the financial entity (e.g.
substitutability, date of last audit, etc.).
RT.99.01 Definitions from Objective of this template is to capture entity-internal
Entities making use explanations, meanings and definitions of the closed set
of the ICT Services of indicators used in the register of information.
For example, in template RT.08.01 financial entities shall
provide an indication of the impact of discontinuation of
the ICT services by using a closed set of options (low,
medium, high). In template RT99.01 the financial entity
needs to specify the meaning of those options.
12
Register of information at sub-consolidated and consolidated level
5. The register of information at entity level is composed of 14 templates. 10 out of 14 templates
are the same templates used by financial entities at entity level. The remaining 4 templates are
to be used to link the registers of information of the various entities in scope of the group and to
ensure there is no double counting.
Illustration 2 below shows the relational structure of the templates highlighting the relational keys
used to link one template to another.
Illustration 2: Structure of the register of information at (sub)consolidated level
6. Also in case of the templates at (sub)consolidated level, except for templates RT.01.01,
RT.99.01, and RT.99.02, all templates of the register of information are linked to one another by
using relational keys. In case of registers of information maintained at (sub)consolidated level,
the different relational keys used are the same four used for the register of information at entity
level plus the LEI code of the entity making use of the ICT services.
Table 2 provides the objective of the templates in the register of information at (sub)consolidated
level.
Table 2: Objectives of each template of the register of information at (sub)consolidated level
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.01.02 Financial entity Objective of this template is to identify the financial
maintaining the entity maintaining and updating the register of
register of information at sub-consolidated or consolidated level.
information
13
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.02.01 Contractual Objective of this template is to list all contractual
Arrangements – arrangements between the entities signing and the direct
General Information ICT third-party service providers.
For each contractual arrangement between the entity
signing and the direct ICT third party service provider, the
financial entity maintaining and updading the register of
information shall assign a unique ‘contractual
arrangement reference number’ to identify
unambiguously the contractual arrangement itself.
RT.02.02 Contractual Objective of this template is to provide details in relation
Arrangements – to each contractual arrangement listed in template
specific information RT.02.01 with regard to:
(i) the ICT services included in the scope of the
arrangement;
(ii) the functions of the financial entities
supported by those ICT services;
(iii) other important information in relation to
the specific ICT services provided (e.g. notice
period, law governing the arrangement, etc.).
This template will enable ESAs and CAs to further
understand the features of the service provision subject to
the reported contractual arrangements.
RT.02.03 List of intra-group Objective of this template is to enable the reconciliation
contractual of the register of information at entity level once
arrangements and consolidated at group level in case one or more providers
links with contractual in the contractual chain are parts of the same group.
arrangements with
ICT third-party
service provider
which are not part of
the same group
RT.03.01 Entities signing the Objective of this template is to provide information on
Contractual the entities signing the contractual arrangements with
Arrangements for the direct ICT third-party service providers on behalf of
receiving ICT the entities making use of the ICT services.
service(s) or on Within the scope of sub-consolidation and consolidation,
behalf of the entities the financial entity making use of the ICT services
making use of the ICT provided is not necessarily the entity signing the
service(s) contractual arrangement with the ICT third-party service
providers.
14
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.04.01 Entities making use Objective of this template is to list all entities making use
of the ICT services of the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service
providers.
The entities making use of the ICT services shall be either
the financial entities in scope or the ICT intra-group
service providers.
RT.05.01 ICT third-party Objective of this template is to list and provide general
service providers information to enable the identification of:
(iii) the direct ICT third-party service providers;
(iv) the subcontractors.
RT.05.02 ICT service supply Objective of this template is to identify and link to one
chains another the ICT third-party service providers, which are
part of the same ICT service supply chain.
Financial entities shall identify and rank the ICT third-
party service providers for each ICT service included in
the scope of each contractual arrangement.
Example: a financial entity has a contractual arrangement
with an ICT third-party service provider (say, ICT third-
party service provider X) to receive 2 specific ICT services
(say ICT service A and ICT service B) and the service
provider makes use of a subcontractor (say, ICT third-
party service provider Y) to provide one of these services
(say ICT service B).
▪ In relation to ICT service A, the ICT service supply
chain is composed of one ICT third-party service
provider, ICT third-party service provider X, which
will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the template. ICT third-party
service provider X is the direct ICT third-party service
provider.
▪ In relation to ICT service B, the ICT service supply
chain is composed of two ICT third-party service
providers:
(i) ICT third-party service provider X, which
will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the template. ICT
third-party service provider X is the
direct ICT third-party service provider.
(ii) ICT third-party service provider Y, which
will be given ‘rank’ 2 in the template. ICT
third-party service provider Y is a
subcontractor.
15
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
All ICT third-party service providers belonging to the
same ICT service supply chain share the same
‘contractual arrangement reference number’ as referred
to in template RT.02.01 and ICT service identifier as
referred to in template RT.07.01.
RT.05.03 Alternative ICT third- Objective of this template is to request financial entities
party service to report basic information on the alternative ICT third-
providers party service provider(s) identified by the financial
entities as alternative provider(s), either already under
contract or only considered by the financial entity.
In case the direct ICT third-party service provider is an ICT
intra-group service providers, financial entities shall not
report ‘alternative direct ICT third-party service
providers’.
RT.06.01 Functions Objective of this template is to identify and provide
identification information on the functions of the financial entities in
the scope of sub-consolidation or consolidation.
In the information to be provided within this template,
financial entities shall include a unique identifier, the
‘function identifier’ for each combination of a financial
entity LEI, licenced activity and function.
Example: a financial entity which operates under two
licensed activities (say, activity A and activity B) will
identify two unique ‘function identifiers’ for the same
function Y (e.g. Sales) performed for activity A and
activity B.
RT.07.01 ICT services Objective of this template is to identify through the
identification creation of an ‘ICT service identifier’ the ICT services
provided by ICT third-party service providers to the
‘entities making use of the ICT services’ when the ICT
service is not listed in Annex III.
RT.08.01 Assessments of the Objective of this template is to capture information in
ICT services relation to the risk assessment on the ICT services (e.g.
substitutability, date of last audit, etc.).
RT99.01 Definitions from Objective of this template is to capture entity-internal
Entities making use explanation, meaning and definitions of the closed set of
of the ICT Services indicators used in the register of information.
For example, in template RT.08.01 financial entities shall
provide an indication of the impact of discontinuation of
the ICT services by using a closed set of options (low,
medium, high). In template RT99.01 the financial entity
needs to specify the meaning of those options.
16
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT99.02 List of financial Objective of this template is to list all the financial
entities within the entities within the scope of sub-consolidation and
scope of sub- consolidation.
consolidation and
consolidation
17
ICT service supply chain
7. Another key objective of the register of information as described in paragraph 4 is to capture the
ICT service supply chain. As described above, Template RT.05.02 aims at fulfilling this specific
objective. Illustration 3 provides an illustrative and simplified example of an ICT service supply
chain.
Illustration 3: Example of an ICT service supply chain
8. To acquire a clear and precise visualisation of an ICT service supply chain in the register of
information, the following information is required:
a. the contractual arrangement reference number between the FE and the first ICT third-party
service provider(s) in the ICT service supply chain (direct ICT third-party service provider)
which shall be unique and common for all the elements of a same ICT service supply chain4;
b. The ICT service identifier, which is common for all the elements of the same ICT service supply
chain5;
c. The rank of each ICT third-party service provider, which is part of the ICT service supply chain,
starting from the direct ICT third-party servce providers (at rank 1) up to the last material
subcontractor in the ICT service supply chain;
d. The link between all ICT-third party service providers, which are part of the same ICT service
supply chain (the provider and receiver of ICT services).
4 The contract reference number is defined by the FE in Template RT.02.01
5 The ICT service identifier is defined by the FE in Template RT.07.01
18
4. Next steps
9. The consultation period will run from 19 June 2023 to 11 September 2023. The final draft ITS will
be published after consultation by 16 January 2024.
19
5. Draft implementing technical
standards
COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) …/...
of XX Month YYYY
laying down implementing technical standards with regard to standard templates for
the register of information according to Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European
Parliament and of the Council
(Text with EEA relevance)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council,
of 14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending
Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014
and (EU) 2016/1011 and, in particular the second subparagraph of Article 28(9) thereof,
Whereas:
(1) Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 requires financial entities, as part of their
ICT risk management framework, maintain and update at entity level, at sub-
consolidated and consolidated levels, a register of information in relation to all
contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT Third Party
Service Providers (Article 28(3) of DORA).
(2) In this regard, Article 28(9) of the Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 mandates the ESAs to
develop draft implementing technical standards ( “Regulation”) to establish the standard
templates for the purposes of the register of information, including information that is
common to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services.
(3) This Regulation shall be read taking into account the threefold purpose of the register
of information: (i) the register of information is part of the ICT risk management
framework of financial entities in accordance with Article 28(1); (ii) the register of
information enables the effective supervision of financial entities’ compliance with the
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 in accordance to in Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU)
2022/2554, including (iii) the designation of critical ICT third-party service providers
at Union level by the European Supervisory Authorities in the context of the oversight
framework according to Chapter V, Section II of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
(4) Financial entities are expected to use the common templates for the register of
information when setting their register of information at entity, sub-consolidated, and
20
consolidated level. As part of the implementation of the templates introduced by this
Regulation, financial entities should complement the information reported in those
templates by tailoring them to their internal and entity risk management purposes,
including ICT and third-party risk management purposes.
(5) Pursuant to Article 28(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the ICT third-party risk
management frameworks of financial entities take into account the nature, scale,
complexity and importance of ICT-related dependencies, as well as the risks arising
from the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers. This should
be done taking into account the criticality or importance of the service, process or
function and the potential impact on the continuity and availability of financial services
and activities, at entity and at group level.
(6) Union financial services sectoral specific laws contain certain rules on outsourcing,
which have been further detailed by the ESAs through the development of guidelines
containing the expectation for some financial entities to record specific information on
their outsourcing arrangements, in some cases also in the form of registers, as part of
their outsourcing risk management. In the recent years, several National and European
Competent Authorities performed data collection of information included in such
registers as part of their supervision of financial entity compliance to the outsourcing
requirements.
(7) Since financial entities shall maintain and update the register of information at entity,
sub-consolidated and consolidated level in accordance with Article 28(3) of Regulation
(EU) 2022/2554, considering the purposes set out above, and leveraging on the lessons
learned from the different exercise of data collection of outsourcing registers as
described above, the templates established by this Regulation are designed in a
technology-neutral manner building up on open tables (i.e. tables with a predefined
number of column but an indefinite number of rows). In addition, the templates are
linked to one another by using different specific keys to form a relational structure
between them. Furthermore, to ensure clarity, readability and comparability of the
register of information, this Regulation provides for two distinct, but related, sets of
templates: the first one to be maintained and updated by financial entities at entity level
and the second one to be maintained and updated at sub-consolidated and consolidated
level.
(8) In line with Article 30(1) of the Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, in order to receive any type
of ICT services from an ICT third-party service provider, including from ICT intra-
group service providers, financial entities negotiate a written contract with the ICT third-
party service provider. In case of groups, ICT intra-group service providers may arrange
a contract with ICT third-party providers external to the group to provide ICT services
to one or more financial entities of the group. In order to capture the full ICT service
supply chain under such practice, financial entities maintaining the register of
information at entity level report both information on the contractual arrangement with
their ICT intra-group service provider and on the arrangement stipulated by the ICT
intra-group service provider and the ICT third-party providers external to the group as
sub-contractors. In order to manage this and other similar cases, the register of
information at sub-consolidated and consolidated level includes a template allowing the
reconciliation between the intra-group contracts and the contracts with ICT third-party
service providers external to the group.
21
(9) The register of information focuses on the operational link between the financial entities
and the ICT third-party service providers, including details onthe functions of the
financial entities supported by the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service
providers. Thus, the contractual arrangement reference numbers always refer to the
contractual arrangement between the entity signing the contractual arrangement and the
direct ICT third-party provider. For all parties (direct ICT third-party service providers
and subcontractors) of the same ICT service supply chain, the register of information
always refers to the contract reference number of the first contractual arrangement of
the ICT service supply chain, which is the contractual arrangement between the direct
ICT third-party service provider and the financial entity.
(10) In order to enable the Competent Authorities, the Oversight Forum and the ESAs to
carry out their duties as stipulated in Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, it is necessary to
unambiguously and consistently identify financial entities and ICT third-party service
providers both at national and international level. In contrast to national codes or
company names, the concept of the legal entity identifier (LEI) of financial entities and
ICT third-party service providers allows for such unambiguous identification. Also, the
use of LEIs improves the quality and timeliness of aggregated data and reduces the
reporting burden for reporting entities. Therefore, when maintaining and updating the
register of information financial entities use a valid LEI to identify themselves and their
ICT third-party service providers (providing ICT services to them directly or via
subcontracting). ICT third-party service providers that are individuals acting in a
business capacity could have alternative predefined options to be identified other than
using the LEI (in case the latter is not available).
(11) In order to allow interoperability of the different registers of information within the same
group, at national and European level, financial entities should ensure the correctness
and consistency of all the data in the register of information over time. In particular, the
contractual arrangement reference numbers and the unique identifiers of the financial
entities and ICT third-party service providers (i.e. ‘LEI’) are crucial to ensure such
interoperability.
(12) As each financial entity, including financial entities from the same group, have their
own internal taxonomy of functions depending on their specific business models and
internal organisations, financial entities should themselves create a function identifier at
individual and group level to enable the clear mapping between the functions of the
financial entities and the ICT services purchased by the latter.
(13) Competent Authorities, as described by Article 46 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, will
use the register of information for the purposes of supervision of financial entities’
compliance with Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. The Oversight Forum established
pursuant to Article 32 of the Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 will make extensive use of the
information included in register of informationregister of information in the annual
process to designate the critical ICT third-party service providers subject to the
oversight framework. In order to enable the orderly execution of these activities, the
financial entities are expected to be able to provide their Registers of Information to the
relevant competent authorities using the defined uniform formats and secure electronic
channels. The structure of the templates and the requirements of the data points are
designed considering data management and reporting perspectives to ensure consistency
and harmonisation by design and avoid burdensome reprocessing of data for reporting
purposes.
22
(14) The European Supervisory Authorities have conducted open public consultations on the
draft implementing technical standards on which this Regulation is based, analysed the
potential related costs and benefits and requested the advice of the ESAs’ Stakeholder
Groups established in accordance with Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010,
Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 and Article 37 of Regulation (EU) No
1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council6.
HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
CHAPTER I
SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
Article 1
Subject matter
This Regulation lays down implementing technical standards on the standard templates for the
purpose of the register of information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of
ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers referred to in Article 28(3) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
1. ‘direct ICT third-party service provider’ means an ICT third-party service provider,
including ICT intra-group service providers, that signed a contractual arrangement with:
a. a financial entity to provide its ICT services directly to that financial entity;
b. a financial or a non-financial entity to provide its services indirectly to other
financial entities within the same group.
The ‘rank’ of the direct ICT third-party service provider in the ‘ICT service supply
chain’ is always ‘1’.
6 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p.12-47).
Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/79/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p.48-
83).
Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European
Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/77/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010 p. 84-119)
23
2. ‘subcontractor’ means an ICT third-party service provider, including ICT intra-group
service providers, that provides ICT services to another ICT third-party service provider
in the same ‘ICT service supply chain’.
The ‘rank’ of the subcontractor in the ‘ICT service supply chain’ is always higher than
‘1’;
3. ‘ICT service supply chain’ means a sequence of contractual arrangements connected
with the ICT service being provided by the direct ICT third-party service provider to
the financial entity, starting with the direct ICT-third party service provider which has
one or multiple other ICT third-party service providers as counterparties
(subcontractors);
4. ‘rank’ means the position or order of an ICT third-party service provider in the ‘ICT
service supply chain’. The ‘rank’ assigned to each ICT third-party service provider is
any integer higher or equal to ‘1’.
Article 3
Data points requirements
1. Financial entities maintaining and updating the register of information at entity level,
sub-consolidated or consolidated level shall fill-in the templates of the register of
information with data using the formats set out in the instructions in Annex I, for register
of information at entity level, and Annex II, for register of information at sub-
consolidated and consolidated level and in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) unless otherwise specified in Annex I and/or Annex II, each template composing
the register of information is a table with a predefined number of columns but
an indefinite number of rows;
(b) when filling-in the register of information financial entities shall complete each
data point with a single value. If more than one value is valid for a specific data
point, the financial entity shall add an additional row in the corresponding
template for each valid value;
(c) unless identified as optional in the template-specific instructions in Annex I
and/or Annex II, financial entities shall report all data points in the register of
information at entity level, sub-consolidated and consolidated level, where
applicable. If the data is not applicable, financial entities shall record the string
‘not applicable’;
(d) unless otherwise stated in the template-specific instructions in Annex I and/or
Annex II, financial entities shall express all the amounts in the same currency
used by the financial entityfor the preparation of the entity, sub-consolidated or
consolidated financial statement respectively;
24
(e) when amounts are in a currency other than the currency used for the purposes of
maintaining the register of information, financial entities shall convert the
amounts into the reporting currency using the same basis of conversion as they
use for accounting purposes.
CHAPTER II
REGISTER OF INFORMATION AT ENTITY LEVEL
Article 4
General requirements for maintaining and updating the register of information at entity
level
1. Financial entities that maintain and update the register of information in accordance
with Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/254 shall ensure that:
a. the register of information includes the required information in relation to all the
ICT services provided by direct ICT third-party providers;
b. the register of information includes information on all the material
subcontractors when an ICT service provided by a direct ICT third-party service
provider is supporting a critical or important function of the financial entities.
2. Financial entities shall ensure that the information recorded in the register of
information is accurate and consistent over time. Financial entities shall promptly
correct any errors or discrepancies as soon as such are detected.
3. Financial entities shall update the information contained in register of information on
an on-going basis considering all changes to existing contractual arrangements and
information in relation to all new contractual arrangements.
4. When establishing the register of information for the first time, financial entities shall
include in the register of information all the mandatory information in relation to
contractual arrangements in place at that time.
5. Financial entities shall maintain the information in the register of information in relation
to contractual arrangements that are terminated for at least 5 years after the termination
of the ICT services provision. Furthermore, financial entities shall ensure that the
register of information has an audit trail functionality that allows to retrieve changes
that significantly affects or are likely to significantly affect the information contained in
the register of information for at least the previous 5 years.
6. Financial entities shall ensure that the information contained in the register adhere to
the principles of data quality, i.e., accuracy, completeness, consistency, integrity,
25
uniqueness, and validity. Aggregated information shall be comparable to information
providedin other regulatory or statistical reporting.
7. Financial entities shall use a valid and active legal entity identifier (LEI) to identify their
ICT third-party service providers that are legal persons except those who are individuals
acting in a business capacity and chose not to procure for themselves a valid LEI.
8. When an ICT service provided by a direct ICT third-party service provider is supporting
a critical or important function of the financial entities, financial entities shall ensure
through the direct ICT third-party service provider, that, all the material subcontractors,
with exception of those who are individuals acting in a business capacity, shall procure
and maintain a valid and active legal entity identifier (LEI).
Article 5
Content of the register of information maintained and updated at entity level
Financial entities shall include at least the following information:
a. general information on the financial entity maintaining and updating the register
of information at entity level as specified in template RT.01.01 and in
accordance with the instructions set out in Annex I of this Regulation;
b. general information on the contractual arrangements as specified in template
RT.02.01and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex I of this
Regulation;
c. specific information on the contractual arrangements as specified in template
RT.02.02, and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex I of this
Regulation;
d. information on the direct ICT third-party service providers and subcontractors,
as specified in template RT.05.01and in accordance with the instructions set out
in Annex I of this Regulation;
e. information on the identification of functions as specified in template RT.06.01,
and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex I of this Regulation;
f. information on the identification of ICT services as specified in template
RT.07.01 and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex I of this
Regulation;
g. information on the assessment of the ICT services provided as specified in
template RT.08.01 and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex I of
this Regulation;
26
h. information on the reconciliation between the internal definitions of the financial
entities and the terms included in close lists and taxonomies used when filling
in the templates as specified in template RT.99.01 and in accordance with the
instructions set out in Annex I of this Regulation.
2. Where relevant for their risk management or contract management purposes, financial
entities may include into the register of information additional information not specified
in this Regulation in the format that is most appropriate for the purposes of such
additional information.
CHAPTER III
REGISTER OF INFORMATION ON SUB-CONSOLIDATED AND CONSOLIDATED
LEVEL
Article 6
Responsibility for maintaining and updating register of information at sub-consolidated
and consolidated level
1. In case of groups, all financial entities part of the group shall maintain and update, in
addition to their register at entity level, the register of information at sub-consolidated
and consolidated level.
2. In order to enable the above, the ultimate parent undertaking as defined in Article
48a(1)(1) of Directive 2013/34/EU shall, define, taking into account the respective
applicable financial regulations, the scope of consolidation and sub-consolidation.
3. For the purposes of this Regulation, financial entities shall ensure that the register of
information at sub-consolidated and consolidated level encompasses all entities that are
financial entities and ICT intra-group service providers in scope of consolidation and
sub-consolidation as defined above.
Article 7
Additional requirements for maintaining and updating the register of information at
sub-consolidated and consolidated level
When maintaining and updating register of information at consolidated and, where
relevant at sub-consolidated level, financial entities in addition to the general
requirements set out in Article 3 of this Regulation shall ensure the following:
a. apply mutatis mutandis at the level of the scope of sub-consolidation and
consolidation the requirements as set in Article 5 of this Regulation;
b. that the register of information include information in relation to:
27
i. all ICT services provided by direct ICT third-party providers to the
financial entities and the ICT intra-group service providers within the
scope of consolidation, and, where relevant, sub-consolidation;
ii. all the material subcontractors when an ICT service provided by a direct
ICT third-party service provider is supporting a critical or important
function of the financial entities in scope.
c. that the information recorded in the register of information is accurate and
consistent over time with the information maintained and updated in the registers
of information at entity level by the entities forming a consolidated or, where
relevant, sub-consolidated group. Financial entities shall promptly correct any
errors or discrepancies between all affected registers of information maintained
by the financial entities within the scope of sub-consolidation and consolidation.
Article 8
Content of the register of information maintained and updated at sub-consolidated and
consolidated level
1. In the register of information maintained at sub-consolidated and consolidated level,
financial entities shall include at least the following:
a. general information financial entity maintaining and updating the register of
information either at sub-consolidated or consolidated level as specified in
template RT.01.02 and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II
of this Regulation;
b. general information on the contractual arrangements as specified in template
RT.02.01 and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II of this
Regulation;
c. specific information on the contractual arrangements as specified in template
RT.02.02 and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II of this
Regulation;
d. information on the links between intra-group contractual arrangements and
contractual arrangements with ICT third-party service provider which are not
part of the same group to retrieve entities from same ICT service supply chains
using the contractual reference numbers when part of the ICT service supply
chain is intra-group as specified in template RT.02.03, and in accordance with
the instructions set out in Annex II of this Regulation;
e. information on the entities signing the contractual arrangements with the direct
ICT third-party service providers for receiving ICT services or on behalf of the
28
entities making use of the ICT services as specified in template RT.03.01 and in
accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II of this Regulation;
f. information on the financial entities making use of the ICT services provided by
the ICT third-party service providers as specified in template RT.04.01 and in
accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II of this Regulation;
g. information on the ICT third-party service providers, direct ICT third-party
service providers and subcontractors, as specified in template RT.05.01 and in
accordance with the instructions set out Annex II of this Regulation;
h. information on the identification of functions as specified in template RT.06.01
and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II of this Regulation;
i. information on the identification of ICT services as specified in template
RT.07.01 and in accordance with the instructions set out in Annex II of this
Regulation;
j. general information on the use of the ICT services provided by ICT third-party
providers and supporting the functions of the financial entities making use of the
ICT services provided as specified in template RT.08.01 and in accordance with
the instructions set out in Annex II of this Regulation;
k. information on the reconciliation between the internal definitions of the financial
entities and the terms included in close lists and taxonomies used when filling
in the templates, as specified in template RT.99.01 and in accordance with the
instructions set out in of Annex II of this Regulation;
l. the list of entities included in the scope of sub-consolidation or consolidation
covered in the register of information as specified in template RT.99.02 and in
accordance with the instructions set out in of Annex II of this Regulation.
2. Where relevant for their risk management or contract management purposes, financial
entities may include into the register of information additional information not specified
in this Regulation in the format that is most appropriate for the purposes of such
additional information.
CHAPTER IV
AVAILABILITY OF THE REGISTER OF INFORMATION
Article 9
Access of the competent authorities to the Registers of Information
1. In order to be able to perform their obligations as stated in Article 31(10) of Regulation
(EU) 2022/2554 and in accordance with Article 28(3) of the same Regulation, the
29
competent authorities shall regularly receive the information from the Registers of
Information.
2. To facilitate the discharge of the obligation specified in the paragraph 1 the competent
authorities shall set out appropriate uniform formats and secure electronic channels.
3. To facilitate the discharge of the obligation specified in paragraph 1, financial entities
shall ensure that they:
a. have established capability to provide the Registers of Information to the
competent authorities in accordance with the requested uniform formats and
using the defined secure electronic channels;
b. have procured and maintain a valid and active legal entity identifier (LEI).
CHAPTER V
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 10
Entry into force
1. This regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its
publication in the Official Journal of the European Union
2. This Regulation shall apply from 17 January 2025.
3. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member
States.
Done at Brussels,
For the Commission
The President
On behalf of the President
[Position]
30
ANNEX I
Instructions for filling the register of information
Part 1
General instructions
Financial entities maintaining the register of information at entity level shall fill-in the templates
of the register of information with data using the formats set out in the instructions in Annex I.
Part 2 of this annex lays down instructions to be followed by financial entities to fill in each
column of each template. In order to fill in the information of certain columns, financial entities
shall refer to other annexes of this Regulation or other external sources to fill in the templates.
In such cases, the reference to the relevant annexes or external sources is indicated in the
instructions.
List of the templates
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.01.01 Financial Entity This template identifies the financial entity maintaining
maintaining the the register of information at entity level.
register of
information
RT.02.01 Contractual Objective of this template is to list all contractual
Arrangements – arrangements between the financial entity and its direct
General Information ICT third party service providers.
For each contractual arrangement between the financial
entity and the direct ICT third party service provider,
the financial entity shall assign a unique ‘contractual
arrangement reference number’ to identify
unambiguously the contractual arrangement itself.
RT.02.02 Contractual Objective of this template is to provide details in
Arrangements – relation to each contractual arrangement listed in
specific information template RT.02.01 with regard to:
(i) the ICT services included in the scope of the
arrangement;
(ii) the functions of the financial entities
supported by those ICT services;
(iii) other important information in relation to
the specific ICT services provided (e.g.
31
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
notice period, law governing the
arrangement, etc.).
RT.05.01 ICT third-party Objective of this template is to list and provide general
service providers information to enable the identification of:
(i) the direct ICT third-party service providers;
(ii) the subcontractors.
RT.05.02 ICT service supply Objective of this template is to identify and link one to
chains another the ICT third-party service providers part of the
same ICT service supply chain.
Financial entities shall identify and rank the ICT third-
party service providers for each ICT service included in
the scope of each contractual arrangement.
Example: a financial entity has a contractual
arrangement with an ICT third-party service provider
(say, ICT third-party service provider X) to receive 2
specific ICT services (say ICT service A and ICT
service B) and the service provider makes use of a
subcontractor (say, ICT third-party service provider Y)
to provide one of these services (say ICT service B).
▪ In relation to ICT service A, the ICT service supply
chain is composed by one ICT third-party service
provider, ICT third-party service provider X, which
will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the template. ICT third-
party service provider X is the direct ICT third-
party service provider.
▪ In relation to ICT service B, the ICT service supply
chain is composed by two ICT third-party service
providers:
(i) ICT third-party service provider X,
which will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the
template. ICT third-party service
provider X is the direct ICT third-party
service provider.
(ii) ICT third-party service provider Y,
which will be given ‘rank’ 2 in the
template. ICT third-party service
provider Y is a subcontractor.
All ICT third-party service providers belonging to the
same ICT service supply chain share the same
32
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
‘contractual arrangement reference number’ as referred
in template RT.02.01 and ICT service identifier as
referred in template RT.07.01.
RT.05.03 Alternative ICT Objective of this template is to request financial entities
third-party service to report basic information on the alternative ICT third-
providers party service provider(s) identified as alternative
providers according to Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and
the [Draft RTS on specify the detailed content of the
policy in relation to the contractual arrangements on the
use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions provided by ICT third-party service providers
as mandated by Regulation (EU) 2022/2554], either
already under contract or only considered by the
financial entity.
In case the direct ICT third-party service provider is an
ICT intra-group service providers, financial entities
shall not report ‘alternative direct ICT third-party
service providers’.
RT.06.01 Functions Objective of this template is to identify and provide
identification information on the functions of the financial entity.
Within the information to be provided within this
template, financial entities shall include a unique
identifier, the ‘function identifier’ for each combination
of licenced activity and function
Example: a financial entity which operates under two
licensed activities (say, activity A and activity B) will
identify two unique ‘function identifiers’ for the same
function X (e.g. Sales) performed for activity A and
activity B.
RT.07.01 ICT services Objective of this template is to identify through the
identification creation of a ‘ICT service identifier’ the ICT services
provided by ICT third-party service providers to the
financial entity when the ICT service is not listed in
Annex III.
RT.08.01 Assessments of the Objective of this template is to capture several
ICT services information in relation to the risk assessment on the
ICT services (e.g. substitutability, date of last audit,
etc.).
33
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.99.01 Definitions from Objective of this template is to capture entity-internal
Entities making use explanations, meanings and definitions of the closed set
of the ICT Services of indicators used in the register of information.
For example, in template RT.08.01 financial entities
shall provide an indication of the impact of
discontinuation of the ICT services by using a closed
set of options (low, medium, high). In template
RT99.01 the financial entity needs to specify the
meaning of those options.
.
34
Part 2.
– Template-specific instructions
1. Instructions to fill in template RT.01.01 — Financial Entity maintaining the register of information
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in
Option
RT.01.01.0010 LEI of the financial entity Alphanumerical Identify the financial entity responsible for maintaining the Register on Mandatory
Information using the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-
numeric code based on the ISO 17442 standard valid and active at the
date of last update of the Register of information (RT.01.01.0050).
RT.01.01.0020 Name of the financial Alphanumerical Legal name of the financial entity maintaining the Register of Mandatory
e ntity information.
RT.01.01.0030 Country of the financial Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country where the Mandatory
e ntity license or the registration of the entity responsible for maintaining the
Register on Information has been issued.
RT.01.01.0040 Type of the entity Closed set of Identify the type of the entity using one of the options in the Mandatory
maintaining options following closed list:
the register of
information 1. credit institutions;
2. payment institutions, including payment institutions exempted
pursuant to Directive (EU) 2015/2366;
3. account information service providers;
4. electronic money institutions, including electronic money
institutions exempted pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC;
5. investment firms;
6. crypto-asset service providers as authorised under a Regulation of
the European Parliament and of the Council on markets in crypto-
assets and amending Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No
EN EN
35
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in
Option
1095/2010 and Directives 2013/36/EU and (EU) 2019/1937 (‘the
Regulation on markets in crypto-assets’) and issuers of asset-
referenced tokens;
7. central securities depositories;
8. central counterparties;
9. trading venues;
10. trade repositories;
11. managers of alternative investment funds;
12. management companies;
13. data reporting service providers;
14. insurance and reinsurance undertakings;
15. insurance intermediaries, reinsurance intermediaries and ancillary
insurance intermediaries;
16. institutions for occupational retirement provision;
17. credit rating agencies;
18. administrators of critical benchmarks;
19. crowdfunding service providers;
2 0. securitisation repositories.
RT.01.01.0050 Date of last update Date Identify the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code of the date of the last Mandatory
update made on the register of information.
RT.01.01.0060 Currency Currency Identify the ISO 4217 alphabetic code of the currency used for the Mandatory
preparation of the financial entity’s financial statements
RT.01.01.0070 Value of total assets - of Monetary Monetary value of total assets of the entity making use of the ICT Mandatory
the financial entity services as reported in the entity’s annual financial statement of the
year before the date of the last update of the register of information.
Refer to Annex V for the approach to be followed when filling in this
column.
EN EN
36
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in
Option
RT.01.01.0080 Value of the other Monetary Monetary value of the other financial indicator of the entity making Mandatory
financial indicator of the use of the ICT services as reported in the entity’s annual financial
financial entity statement of the year before the date of the last update of the register
of information.
Refer to Annex V for the approach to be followed when filling in this
column.
EN EN
37
2. Instructions to fill in template RT.02.01 — Contractual Arrangements – General Information
Financial entities shall identify a ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ in relation to each contractual arrangement in scope of the register of
information. In case the ICT third-party service provider is making use of subcontractors, financial entities shall not include in the register of information
a ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ for the arrangements between the ICT third-party service providers and their subcontractors.
The ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ shall refer to the following type of contractual arrangements:
i. any kind of standalone arrangements.
ii. any kind of ‘overarching or framework arrangements’ such as master and framework arrangements;
iii. any kind of ‘subsequent or associated arrangements’ such as implementing arrangements, subservice arrangements, amendments, order forms;
The contract reference number does not refer to any kind of service level agreement subordinated to any of the above mentioned types of contractual
arrangements.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.01.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical Identify the contractual arrangement between the financial entity Mandatory
arrangement and the direct ICT third-party service provider.
reference number
The contractual arrangement reference number is the internal
reference number of the contractual arrangement assigned by the
financial entity.
The contractual arrangement reference number shall be unique
and consistent over time at entity, sub-consolidated and
consolidated level, where applicable.
The contractual arrangement reference number shall be used
consistently across all templates of the register of information
when referring to the same contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0020 Type of Closed set of Identify the type of contractual arrangement by using one of the Mandatory
contractual options options in the following closed list:
arrangement 1. Standalone arrangement
2. Overarching arrangement
EN EN
38
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
3. Subsequent or associated arrangement
RT.02.01.0030 Overarching Alphanumerical Not applicable if the contractual arrangement is the ‘overarching Mandatory
contractual contractual arrangement’ or a ‘standalone arrangement’. In the
arrangement other cases, report the contractual arrangement reference number
reference number of the overarching arrangement, which shall be equal to value as
reported in the column RT.02.01.0010 when reporting the
overarching contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0041 Annual expense or Monetary Annual expense or estimated cost (or intragroup transfer) of the Mandatory
estimated cost of ICT service arrangement for the past year.
the contractual
arrangement for In case of an overarching arrangement with subsequent or
the past year associated arrangements, the sum of the annual expenses or
estimated costs reported for the overarching arrangement and the
subsequent or associated arrangements should be equal to the total
expenses or estimated costs for the overall contractual
arrangement. This means, there should be no repetition or
duplication of annual expenses or estimated costs. The following
cases should be reflected:
(a) if the annual expenses or estimate costs are not
determined at the level of the overarching arrangement
(i.e. they are 0), the annual expenses or estimated costs
should be reported at the level of each subsequent or
associated arrangements.
(b) if the annual expenses or estimated costs cannot be
reported for each of the subsequent or associated
arrangements, the total annual expense or estimated cost
should be reported at the level of the overarching
arrangement.
EN EN
39
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
(c) if there are annual expenses or estimated costs related
to each level of the arrangement, i.e. overarching and
subsequent or associated, and this information is
available, the annual expenses or estimated costs shall be
reported without duplication at each level of the
contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0042 Budget of the Monetary Budget or estimated cost or budget of the contractual arrangement Mandatory
contractual for the upcoming year.
arrangement for
the upcoming year The annual expense or estimated cost shall be expressed in the
currency reported in RT.01.01.0060.
In case of an overarching arrangement with subsequent or
associated arrangements, the sum of the budget reported for the
overarching arrangement and the subsequent or associated
arrangements should be equal to the total budget for the overall
contractual arrangement. This means, there should be no
repetition or duplication of budget. The following cases should be
reflected:
(a) if the budget is not determined at the level of the
overarching arrangement (i.e. they are 0), the budget
should be reported at the level of each subsequent or
associated arrangements.
(b) if the budget cannot be reported for each of the
subsequent or associated arrangements, the total budget
should be reported at the level of the overarching
arrangement.
EN EN
40
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
(c) if there is a budget related to each level of the
arrangement, i.e. overarching and subsequent or
associated, and this information is available, the budget
shall be reported without duplication at each level of the
contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0050 Approval from [Yes/No] Indicate if the specific arrangement was subject to management Mandatory
the management body approval as defined in Article 3(30) of Regulation (EU)
body 2022/2554 using one of the options in the following closed list:
1. Yes
2. No
RT.02.01.0060 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory
third-party
service provider Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
contractual arrangement by reporting the LEI
RT.02.01.0071 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory
identify the ICT
third-party Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
service provider contractual arrangement by reporting the other code
RT.02.01.0072 Country of Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory
issuance of the
other code to Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
identify the ICT contractual arrangement by reporting the country of issuance of
third-party the other code
service provider
RT.02.01.0073 Type of other code Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory
to identify options
EN EN
41
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
the ICT third- Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
party service contractual arrangement by reporting the type of other code
provider
EN EN
42
3. Instructions to fill in template RT.02.02 — Contractual Arrangements – Specific information
Financial entities shall maintain this template at the maximum level of granularity possible. In order to do so, in case the contractual arrangement includes
multiple ICT services supporting multiple functions, use as many rows as the elements in the matrix resulting combining the ICT services covered in the
contractual arrangement and the financial entity’s functions.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.02.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical A s reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
arrangement
reference number
RT.02.02.0020 Function identifier Alphanumerical A s defined by the financial entity in RT.06.01.0010 Mandatory
RT.02.02.0030 ICT services Alphanumerical A s defined by the financial entity in RT.07.01.0010 Mandatory
identifier
RT.02.02.0040 Start date of the Date Identify the date of entry into force of the contractual arrangement as Mandatory
contractual stipulated in the contractual arrangement using the ISO 8601 (yyyy–
arrangement mm–dd) code
RT.02.02.0050 Date of next Date Identify the date of contract renewal as stipulated in the contractual Mandatory
renewal of the arrangement or as planned by the parties using the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–
contractual dd) code. If the contractual arrangement is indefinite, it shall be filled in
arrangement with ‘9999-12-31’.
RT.02.02.0060 End date of the Date Identify the end date as stipulated in the contractual arrangement using Mandatory
contractual the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code. If the contractual arrangement is
arrangement indefinite, it shall be filled in with ‘9999-12-31’. If the contractual
arrangement has been terminated on a date different than the end date,
this shall be filled in with the termination date.
RT.02.02.0070 Reason of the Closed set of In case the contractual arrangement has been terminated or it is ended, Mandatory if
termination or options identify the reason of the termination or ending of the contractual the contractual
ending of the arrangements using one of the options in the following closed list: arrangement is
contractual terminated
arrangement
EN EN
43
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
1. Termination not for cause. The contractual arrangement has
expired/ended and has not been renewed by any of the party;
2. Termination for cause. The contractual arrangement has been
terminated, being the ICT third-party service provider in a breach
of applicable law, regulations or contractual provisions
3. Termination for cause. The contractual arrangement has been
terminated, due to impediments of the ICT third-party service
provider capable of altering the supported function are identified;
4. Termination for cause: The contractual arrangement has been
terminated due to weaknesses of the ICT third-party provider
regarding the management and security of sensitive data or
information of any of the counterparty;
5. Termination following a request by any Authority. The
contractual arrangement has been terminated following a request
by a Competent Authority.
6. Other. The contractual arrangement has been terminated by any
of the party for any reason different from the above.
RT.02.02.0080 Notice period for Integer Identify the notice period for terminating the contractual arrangement by Mandatory
the financial entity the financial entity in a business-as-usual case. The notice period shall
be expressed as number of calendar days from the receipt of the
counterparty of the request to terminate the ICT service.
RT.02.02.0090 Notice period for Integer Identify the notice period for terminating contractual arrangement by the Mandatory
the ICT third-party direct ICT third-party service provider in a business-as-usual case. The
service provider notice period shall be expressed as number of calendar days from the
receipt of the counterparty of the request to terminate the ICT service.
EN EN
44
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.02.0100 Country of the Country Identify the country of the governing law of the contractual arrangement Mandatory
governing law of using the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code.
the contractual
arrangement
RT.02.02.0110 Country of Country Identify the country of provision of the ICT services using the ISO 3166– Mandatory
provision of the 1 alpha–2 code.
ICT services
RT.02.02.0121 Storage of data [Yes/No] Is the ICT service related to (or foresees) storage of data? Mandatory
One of the options provided in the following closed list:
1. Yes
2. No
RT.02.02.0122 Location of the data Country Identify the country of location of the data at rest (storage) using the ISO Mandatory if
at rest (storage) 3 166–1 alpha–2 code. ’Yes’ is
reported in
RT.02.02.0121
RT.02.02.0123 Location of Country Identify the country of location of management of the data (processing) Mandatory if
management of the using the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code. the service is
data (processing) based on or
foresees data
processing
RT.02.02.0130 Sensitiveness of the Closed set of Identify the level of sensitiveness of the data stored or processed by the Mandatory if
data stored by the options ICT third-party service provider using one of the options provided in the the ICT third-
ICT third-party following closed list: party service
service provider provider stores
1. Low data
2. Medium
EN EN
45
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
3. High
The most sensitive data take precedence: e.g. if both ‘Medium’ and
‘High’ apply, then ‘High’ shall be selected.
RT.02.02.0140 Are customers data [Yes/No] Identify if customers data is stored or processed by the ICT third-party Mandatory if
stored or processed service provider using one of the options in the following closed list: the ICT third-
by the ICT third- party service
party service 1. Yes provider
provider? 2. No processes or
stores data
RT.02.02.0150 Level of reliance on Closed set of One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory if
the ICT service options the function
supporting the 1. Not significant supported is
critical or 2. Low reliance: in case of disruption of the ICT services, the supported critical or
important function functions would not be significantly impacted (no interruption, no important
important damage) or disruption can be resolved quickly and with
minimal impact on the function/s supported
3. Material reliance: in case of disruption of the ICT services, the
supported functions would be significantly impacted if the disruption
lasts more than few minutes/few hours, and the disruption may
engender damages, but still manageable
4. Full reliance: in case of disruption of the ICT services, the supported
functions would be immediately and severely interrupted/damaged, for
a long period
EN EN
46
4. Instructions to fill in template RT.05.01 — ICT third-party service providers
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.01.0010 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical Identify the ICT third-party service provider using the Legal Entity Mandatory if
third-party Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the ISO the ICT third-
service provider 17442 standard valid and active at the date of last update if the party service
contract is not terminated or cancelled. provider is a
legal person
RT.05.01.0021 Other code to Alphanumerical Other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider Mandatory if
identify the ICT the LEI is not
third-party available and
service provider the ICT third-
party service
provider is not a
legal person
RT.05.01.0022 Country of Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of issuance of Mandatory if
issuance of the the other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider RT.05.01.0021
other code to is reported
identify the ICT
third-party
service provider
RT.05.01.0023 Type of other Closed set of Type of the other code to identify the ICT third-party service Mandatory if
code to identify options provider RT.05.01.0021
the ICT third- is reported
party service One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
provider
1. Corporate registration number
2. VAT number
3. Passport Number
4. National Identity Number
EN EN
47
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.01.0030 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical Legal name of the ICT third-party service provider Mandatory
third-party
service provider
RT.05.01.0040 Type of person of Closed set of One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
the ICT third- options
party service 1. Legal person
provider 2. Individual acting in a business capacity
Providing the LEI is mandatory when the ICT third-party service
provider is a legal person.
RT.05.01.0050 Country of the Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country in which the Mandatory
ICT third-party headquarters of ICT third-party service provider are located.
service provider’s
headquarters
RT.05.01.0060 Registered Alphanumerical Registered address of the ICT third-party service provider as Optional
address of the stipulated in the contractual arrangement.
ICT third-party
service provider
RT.05.01.0070 Business alliance Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
1. The ICT third-party service provider is not part of an alliance;
2. The ICT third-party service provider is part of a group;
3. The ICT third-party service provider is a joint-venture;
4. The ICT third-party service provider is a member of an association
or a partnership of firms;
5. Other case where the ICT third-party service provider is connected
to other legal entities.
RT.05.01.0080 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical Name of the ultimate parent undertaking of the ICT third-party Mandatory
third-party service provider.
EN EN
48
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
service provider’s
ultimate parent In case the ICT third-party service provider is a joint venture where
undertaking the owners have equal part, all the owners shall be reported using
separate rows.
In case the ICT third-party service provider is a member of an
association or a partnership of firms, the name of the coordinating
firm shall be reported.
If the ICT third-party service provider is the ultimate parent
undertaking, ‘Not applicable’ shall be reported.
RT.05.01.0090 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical Identify the ICT third-party service provider's ultimate parent Mandatory if
third-party undertaking using the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, RT.05.01.0080
service provider’s alpha-numeric code based on the ISO 17442 standard valid and is reported
ultimate parent active at the date of last update if the contract is not terminated or
undertaking cancelled.
RT.05.01.0101 Other code to Alphanumerical Other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider’s ultimate Mandatory if
identify the ICT parent undertaking RT.05.01.0080
third-party is reported
service provider’s
ultimate parent
undertaking
RT.05.01.0102 Country of Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of issuance of Mandatory if
issuance of the the other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider's RT.05.01.0101
other code to ultimate parent undertaking is reported
identify the ICT
third-party
service provider’s
ultimate parent
undertaking
EN EN
49
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.01.0103 Name of the Closed set of options Name of the identification system of the other code to identify the Mandatory if
identification ICT third-party service provider's ultimate parent undertaking RT.05.01.0101
system of the is reported
other code to One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
identify the ICT
third-party 1. Corporate registration number
service provider’s 2. VAT number
ultimate parent 3. Passport Number
undertaking 4. National Identity Number
RT.05.01.0110 Country of the Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country in which the Mandatory
ICT third-party parent undertaking's headquarters are located
service provider
ultimate parent
undertaking's
headquarters
RT.05.01.0120 Is the ICT third- [Yes/No] One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
party service
provider an ICT 1. Yes
intra-group 2. No
service provider?
EN EN
50
5. Instructions to fill in template RT.05.02 — ICT service supply chains
This template aims at identifying and linking one to each other the ICT third-party service providers part of the same ICT service supply chain.
The ICT service supply chain shall include, where applicable:
(i) all ICT intragroup service providers;
(ii) all ICT third-party service providers supporting a critical or important function or material parts thereof;
(iii) in case a ICT intragroup service provider makes use of subcontractors to provide their ICT services to the financial entity, at least the first
extra-group ICT third party service provider even if the ICT services provided do not support a critical or important function or material part
thereof.
All ICT third-party service providers belonging to the same ICT service supply chain share:
(i) the same ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ as referred in template RT.02.01;
(ii) the same ‘ICT service identifier’ as referred in template RT.07.01;
Each ICT third-party service providers belonging to the same ICT service supply is assigned with a ‘rank’ (RT.05.02.0040) to identify its position within
the ICT service supply chain. In case multiple ICT third-party service providers have the same position within the same ICT service supply chain, they
will be assigned with the same ‘rank’. The direct ICT third-party service providers are therefore at rank 1. If the rank is higher than 1, the ICT third-party
service providers are subcontractors.
In order to link one to each other the ICT third party service providers belonging to the same ICT service supply chain, for each ICT subcontractor (i.e.
where the ‘rank’ is higher than 1) it is needed to identify the ICT third party service provider recipient of its subcontracted services. The identification
of the ICT third party service provider recipient of subcontracted services shall be carry out by using the columns from RT.05.02.0050 to RT.05.02.0070.
For each ICT service supply chain (i.e., a combination of a "contractual arrangement reference number" and an "ICT service identifier"), if there are
multiple ICT third-party service providers receiving subcontracted services, all of these service providers shall be reported in separate rows in the
template. The same logic applies at each rank of the ICT service supply chain.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.02.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
reference number
RT.05.02.0020 ICT service Alphanumerical As reported in RT.07.01.0010 Mandatory
identifier
EN EN
51
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.02.0030 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory if
third-party service the ICT third-
provider party service
provider is a
legal person
RT.05.02.0041 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory if
identify the ICT the LEI is not
third-party service available and
provider the ICT third-
party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.05.02.0042 Country of issuance Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory if
of the other code to the LEI is not
identify the ICT available and
third-party service the ICT third-
provider party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.05.02.0043 Type of other code Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory if
to identify options the LEI is not
the ICT third-party available and
service provider the ICT third-
party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.05.02.0050 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0030 Mandatory
third-party service
provider
RT.05.02.0060 Rank Integer If the ICT third-party service provider is signing the contractual Mandatory
arrangement with the financial entity, it is considered as a direct ICT
EN EN
52
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
third-party service provider and the ‘rank’ to be reported shall be 1;
If the ICT third-party service provider is signing the contract with the
direct ICT third-party service provider, it is considered as a
subcontractor and the ‘rank’ to be reported shall be 2;
The same logic apply to all the following subcontractors by
incrementing the ‘rank’ until the last contractor in the ICT service
supply chain.
In case multiple ICT third-party service providers have the same ‘rank’
in the ICT service supply chain, financial entities shall report the same
‘rank’ for all those ICT third-party service providers.
RT.05.02.0070 LEI of the recipient Alphanumerical ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is a direct ICT Mandatory
of sub-contracted third-party service provider i.e. at ‘rank’ r = 1 (RT.05.01.0020); Not applicable
ICT services for rank 1
If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1,
indicate the ‘LEI of the recipient of sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’
r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT service (even partially) to the ICT
third-party service provider at ‘rank’ r=n.
To indicate the 'LEI of the recipient of subcontracted services' use the
Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on
the ISO 17442 standard
RT.05.02.0081 Other code to Alphanumerical ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at contracting Mandatory if
identify the rank r = 1 (RT.05.01.0020); the LEI is not
recipient of sub- available and
contracted ICT If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1, the ICT third-
services indicate the ‘Other code to identify the recipient of sub-contracted party service
service’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT service (even provider is not
partially) to the ICT third-party service provider at ‘rank’ r=n. a legal
EN EN
53
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
personn Not
applicable for
rank 1
RT.05.02.0082 Country of issuance Country ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = 1 Mandatory if
of other code to (RT.05.01.0020); RT.05.02.0081
identify the is reported
recipient of sub- If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1, Not applicable
contracted ICT indicate the ‘Country of issuance of other code to identify the recipient for rank 1
services of sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT
service (even partially) to the ICT third-party service provider at ‘rank’
r=n.
To indicate the ‘Country of issuance of other code to identify the
recipient of sub-contracted services’, use the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code
of the country of issuance of the other code to identify the recipient of
s ub-contracted services.
RT.05.02.0083 Type of other code Closed set of ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = 1 Mandatory if
to identify options (RT.05.01.0020); RT.05.02.0081
the recipient of sub- is reported
contracted ICT If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1, Not applicable
services indicate the ‘Type of other code to identify the ICT third-party service for rank 1
provider recipient of sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that
subcontracted the ICT service (even partially) to the ICT third-party
service provider at ‘rank’ r=n.
To indicate the type, one of the options in the following closed list shall
be used:
1. Corporate registration number
2. VAT number
EN EN
54
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
3. Passport Number
4. National Identity Number
RT.05.02.0090 Name of the Alphanumerical ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at contracting Mandatory
recipient of sub- rank r = 1 (RT.05.01.0020); Not applicable
contracted ICT for rank 1
services If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1,
indicate the ‘Name of the ICT third-party service provider recipient of
sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT
service (even partially) to the ICT third-party service provider at ‘rank’
r=n.
6. Instructions to fill in template RT.05.03 — Alternative direct ICT third-party service providers
When supporting an important or critical function, this template aims at listing alternative direct ICT third-party service providers (not the subcontractors)
identified by the financial entity.
In case the direct ICT third-party service provider is an ICT intra-group service providers, financial entities shall not report ‘alternative direct ICT third-
party service providers’.
The identification of an alternative service provider is part of the definition of the exit strategy of financial entities from ICT third-party service providers
supporting critical or important functions. In principle, for each ICT third-party service provider supporting a critical or important function, the assessment
to identify an alternative service provider shall be performed.
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT05.03.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT02.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
arrangement reported in
reference Identify the contractual reference number where the ICT third- RT.08.01.0100
number party service providers have been identified by the financial
entity making use of the ICT services provided when at least a
c ritical or important function is supported
EN EN
55
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT05.03.0020 Function Alphanumerical As reported in RT06.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
identifier reported in
Function identifier to identify the critical or important function RT.08.01.0100
supported by the ICT service provided
RT05.03.0030 ICT service Alphanumerical As reported in RT07.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
identifier reported in
ICT service identifier to identify the ICT service provided RT.08.01.0100
RT05.03.0040 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
third-party reported in
service RT.08.01.0100
provider
RT05.03.0051 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory if the LEI is
identify the not available and if
ICT third- ‘Yes’ is reported in
party service RT.08.01.0100
provider
RT05.03.0052 Country of Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory if
issuance of the RT05.03.0051 is
other code to reported
identify the
ICT third-
party service
provider
RT05.03.0053 Type of other Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory if
code to identify options RT05.03.0051 is
the ICT third- reported
party service
provider
EN EN
56
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT05.03.0060 Alternative Alphanumerical Legal name of the alternative ICT third-party service provider Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
ICT third- reported in
party service RT.08.01.0100
provider name
RT05.03.0070 Alternative Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of the Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
ICT third- alternative ICT third-party service provider reported in
party service RT.08.01.0100
provider
country
EN EN
57
7. Instructions to fill in template RT.06.01 — Functions identification
This template aims at identifying and providing information on the functions of the financial entity according to the financial entity’s internal organisation.
Each combination of the two following items shall have a unique function identifier assigned:
i. ‘Licenced activity’ column RT.06.01.0040
ii. ‘Function name’ column RT.06.01.0051
Financial entities shall use as many rows as the elements in the matrix resulting combining the two items above to fill-in this template.
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.06.01.0010 Function Alphanumerical The function identifier shall be composed by the letter F Mandatory
Identifier (capital letter) followed by an integer (e.g. “F1” for the 1st
function identifier and “Fn” for the nth function identifier with
“n” being an integer).
Each combination between ‘Function name’ (RT.06.01.0051)
and ‘Licenced activity’ (RT.06.01.0040) shall have a unique
function identifier
Example: a financial entity which operates under two licensed
activities (say, activity A and activity B) will identify two
unique ‘function identifiers’ for the same function X (e.g.
Sales) performed for activity A and activity B.
RT.06.01.0020 Licenced Closed set of options Name of the licenced activities as identified in Annex III for the Mandatory
activity different type of financial entities.
In case the function is not linked to a registered or licenced
activity, ‘support functions’ shall be reported.
RT.06.01.0030 Function name Alphanumerical Function name according to the financial entity’s internal Mandatory
organisation.
RT.06.01.0051 Nature of the Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
financial entity 1. The financial entity is a branch
2. The financial entity is not a branch
EN EN
58
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.06.01.0052 Name of the Alphanumerical Name of the branch Mandatory in case ‘the
branch financial entity is a
branch’ is selected in
RT.06.01.0031
RT.06.01.0053 Country of the Country Country in which the branch is located with alpha-2 country Mandatory in case ‘the
branch codes to be used. financial entity is a
branch’ is selected in
RT.06.01.0031
RT.06.01.0061 Criticality or [Yes/No] Use this column to indicate whether the function is critical or Mandatory
importance important according to the financial entity’s assessment. One of
assessment the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Yes
2. No
3. Assessment not performed
RT.06.01.0062 Reasons for Alphanumerical Brief explanation on the reasons to classify the function as Optional
criticality or critical or important (300 characters maximum)
importance
RT.06.01.0063 Date of the last Date Identify the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code of the date of the Mandatory
assessment of last assessment of criticality or importance in case the function
criticality or is supported by ICT services provided by ICT third-party
importance service providers.
In case the function’s assessment of criticality or importance is
not performed, it shall be filled in with ‘9999-12-31’
RT.06.01.0070 Function is [Yes/No] Use this column to indicate whether the function is considered Mandatory
considered time-critical according to the financial entity’s assessment. One
time-critical of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Yes
2. No
EN EN
59
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
3. Assessment not performed
RT.06.01.0080 Recovery time Integer In number of hours. If the recovery time objective is less than 1 Mandatory
objective of hour, ‘1’ shall be reported. In case the recovery time objective
the function of the function is not defined ‘0’ shall be reported.
RT.06.01.0090 Recovery Integer In number of hours. If the recovery point objective is less than 1 Mandatory
point objective hour, ‘1’ shall be reported. In case the recovery time objective
of the function of the function is not defined ‘0’ shall be reported.
RT.06.01.0100 Impact of Closed set of options Use this column to indicate the impact of discontinuing the Mandatory
discontinuing function according to the financial entity’s assessment. One of
the function the options in the following closed list shall be used
1. Low
2. Medium
3. High
4. Assessment not performed
EN EN
60
8. Instructions to fill in template RT.07.01 — ICT services identification
Objective of this template is to identify through the creation of a ‘ICT service identifier’ the ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers
to the financial entity in case the ICT service is not listed in Annex III. If the ICT service is listed in Annex III, the ICT service identifier is the one
indicated in Annex III.
Each ICT service shall have a unique ‘ICT service identifier’ assigned.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.07.01.0010 ICT service Alphanumerical The ICT service identifier shall be composed by the letter S (capital Mandatory
identifier letter) followed by an integer (e.g. “S21” for the 21st ICT service
identifier and “Sn” for the nth ‘ICT services identifier’ with “n”
being an integer where n>20).
If the ICT service is listed in Annex IV the ICT service identifier is
t he one indicated in Annex IV.
RT.07.01.0021 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical Financial entities shall report the name of the ICT service in case it Mandatory
service i s not listed in Annex IV.
RT.07.01.0022 Description of Alphanumerical A brief (maximum 300 characters) description of the ICT service Mandatory
the ICT service provided, in case it is not listed in Annex IV, including the data that
provided are being processed and stored.
EN EN
61
9. Instructions to fill in template RT.08.01 — Assessment of the ICT services
When supporting an important or critical function, this template aims at further assessing the ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers
to the financial entity.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.08.01.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
arrangement
reference
number
RT.08.01.0020 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory
third-party
service
provider
RT.08.01.0031 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory
identify the
ICT third-
party service
provider
RT.08.01.0032 Country of Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory
issuance of the
other code to
identify the
ICT third-
party service
provider
RT.08.01.0033 Type of other Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory
code to identify options
the ICT third-
party service
provider
EN EN
62
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.08.01.0040 ICT service Alphanumerical A s reported in RT.07.01.0010 Mandatory
identifier
RT.08.01.0051 Substitutability Closed set of options Use this column to provide the results of the financial entity’s Mandatory
of the ICT assessment in relation to the degree of substitutability of the ICT
third-party third-party service provider to perform the specific ICT services
service supporting a critical or important function.
provider
One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Not substitutable
2. Highly complex substitutability
3. Medium complexity in terms of substitutability
4. Easily substitutable
RT.08.01.0052 Reason if the Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory in
ICT third- case “not
party service 1. The lack of real alternatives, even partial, due to the limited substitutable”
provider is number of ICT third-party service providers active on a specific or “highly
considered not market, or the market share of the relevant ICT third-party service complex
substitutable provider, or the technical complexity or sophistication involved, substitutability”
or difficult to including in relation to any proprietary technology, or the specific is selected in
be features of the ICT third-party service provider’s organisation or RT.08.01.0051
substitutable activity.
2. Difficulties in relation to partially or fully migrating the relevant
data and workloads from the relevant ICT third- party service
provider to another ICT third-party service provider or to
reintegrate them in the financial entity’s operations, due either to
significant financial costs, time or other resources that the
migration process may entail, or to increased ICT risk or other
operational risks to which the financial entity.
3. Both abovementioned reasons
EN EN
63
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.08.01.0060 Date of the last Date Use this column to provide the date of the last audit on the specific Mandatory
audit on the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service provider.
ICT third-
party service This column relates to audits conducted by:
provider (i) the internal audit department or any other additional
qualified personnel of the financial entity,
(ii) a joint team together with other clients of the same ICT
third-party service provider (“pooled audit”) or
(iii) a third party appointed by the supervised entity to audit
the service provider.
This column does not relate to the reception or reference date of
third-party certifications or internal audit reports of the ICT third-
party service provider, the annual monitoring date of the
arrangement by the financial entity or the date of review of the risk
assessment by the financial entity.
This column shall be used to report all types of audits performed
by any of the subjects listed above concerning fully or partially the
ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service provider.
To report the date, the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code shall be
used.
If no audit has been performed, it shall be filled in with ‘9999-12-
31’.
RT.08.01.0070 Existence of an [Yes/No] Use this column to report the existence of an exit plan from the Mandatory
exit plan ICT third-party service provider in relation to the specific ICT
service provided.
EN EN
64
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Yes
2. No
RT.08.01.0080 Possibility of Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
reintegration
of the 1. Easy
contracted ICT 2. Difficult
service 3. Highly complex
In case the ICT service is provided by a ICT third-party service
provider that is not an ICT intra-group service provider
RT.08.01.0090 Impact of Closed set of options Use this column to provide the impact for the financial entity of Mandatory
discontinuing discontinuing the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party
the ICT service provider according to the financial entity’s assessment.
services One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Low
2. Medium
3. High
4.Assessment not performed
RT.08.01.0100 Are there [Yes/No] One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
alternative
ICT third- 1. Yes
party service 2. No
providers
identified?
In principle, for each ICT third-party service provider supporting a
critical or important function, the assessment to identify an
alternative service provider shall be performed.
EN EN
65
10. Instructions to fill in template RT99.01 — Definitions from the financial entity
RT.99.01.C0010 RT.99.01.C0020 RT.99.01.C0030 RT.99.01.C0040
Column Code Column Name Option Description/Internal definition of the option
RT.99.01.R0010 1. Standalone arrangement
Type of
RT.99.01.R0020 2. Overarching arrangement
RT.02.01.0020 contractual
3. Subsequent or associated
RT.99.01.R0030 arrangement
arrangement
RT.99.01.R0040 Sensitiveness of 1. Low
RT.99.01.R0050
RT.02.02.0130
the data stored by 2. Medium
the ICT third-party
RT.99.01.R0060 3. High
service provider
RT.99.01.R0070 1. Low
Impact of
RT.99.01.R0080 2. Medium
RT.06.01.0090 discontinuing the
RT.99.01.R0090 3. High
function
RT.99.01.R0100 4. Assessment not performed
RT.99.01.R0110 1. Not substitutable
RT.99.01.R0120 Substitutability of 2. Highly complex substitutability
RT.08.01.0031 the ICT third-party 3. Medium complexity in terms of
RT.99.01.R0130
service provider substitutability
RT.99.01.R0140 4. Easily substitutable
RT.99.01.R0150 Possibility of 1. Easy
reintegration of the
RT.99.01.R0160
RT.08.01.0080
2. Difficult
contracted ICT
RT.99.01.R0170 3. Highly complex
service
RT.99.01.R0180 1. Low
Impact of
RT.99.01.R0190 2. Medium
RT.08.01.0090 discontinuing the
RT.99.01.R0200 3. High
ICT services
RT.99.01.R0210 4.Assessment not performed
EN EN
66
ANNEX II
Instructions for filling the register of information at sub-consolidated and consolidated
levels
Part 1
General instructions
Financial entities while maintaining and updating the register of information at sub-
consolidated and consolidated level, shall fill-in the templates of the register of information
with data using the formats set out in the instructions in Annex II.
Part 2 of this annex lays down instructions to be followed by financial entities to fill in each
column of each template. In order to fill in the information of certain columns, financial entities
shall refer to other annexes of this Regulation or other external sources to fill in the templates.
In such cases, the reference to the relevant annexes or external sources is indicated in the
instructions.
Financial entities shall include all the following entities within the sub-consolidation and
consolidation scope:
▪ the financial entities making use of the ICT services provided by direct ICT third-party
service providers;
▪ the entities signing the contractual arrangement with the direct ICT third-party service
providers.
List of the templates
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.01.02 Financial entity This template identifies the financial entity maintaining
maintaining the the register of information at sub-consolidated or
register of consolidated level.
information
RT.02.01 Contractual This template lists all contractual arrangements
Arrangements – between the entities signing and the direct ICT third
General Information party service providers.
For each contractual arrangement between the entity
signing and the direct ICT third party service provider,
the financial entity maintaining the register of
information shall assign a unique ‘contractual
EN
67
EN
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
arrangement reference number’ to identify
unambiguously the contractual arrangement itself.
RT.02.02 Contractual Objective of this template is to provide details in
Arrangements – relation to each contractual arrangement listed in
specific information template RT.02.01 with regard to:
(i) the ICT services included in the scope of the
arrangement;
(ii) the functions of the financial entities
supported by those ICT services;
(iii) other important information in relation to
the specific ICT services provided (e.g.
notice period, law governing the
arrangement, etc.).
RT.02.03 List of intra-group Objective of this template is to enable the
contractual reconciliation of the register of information at entity
arrangements and level once consolidated at group level in case one or
links with more providers in the ICT service supply chain are
contractual parts of the same group.
arrangements with
ICT third-party
service provider
which are not part of
the same group
RT.03.01 Entities signing the Objective of this template is to provide information on
Contractual the entities signing the contractual arrangements with
Arrangements for the direct ICT third-party service providers for the
receiving ICT entities making use of the ICT services.
service(s) or on
Within the scope of sub-consolidation and
behalf of the entities
consolidation, the financial entity making use of the
making use of the
ICT services provided is not necessarily the entity
ICT service(s)
signing the contractual arrangement with the ICT
third-party service providers.
RT.04.01 Entities making use Objective of this template is to ensure that all entities
of the ICT services making uses of the ICT services provided by the ICT
third-party service providers are registered in the
register of information.
EN
68
EN
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
The entities making use of the ICT services shall be
either the financial entities in scope, either the ICT
intra-group service providers .
RT.05.01 ICT third-party Objective of this template is to list and provide general
service providers information to enable the identification of:
(i) the direct ICT third-party service providers;
(ii) the subcontractors.
RT.05.02 ICT service supply Objective of this template is to identify and link one to
chains another the ICT third-party service providers part of
the same ICT service supply chain.
Financial entities shall identify and rank the ICT third-
party service providers for each ICT service included
in the scope of each contractual arrangement.
Example: a financial entity has a contractual
arrangement with an ICT third-party service provider
(say, ICT third-party service provider X) to receive 2
specific ICT services (say ICT service A and ICT
service B) and the service provider makes use of a
subcontractor (say, ICT third-party service provider
Y) to provide one of these services (say ICT service
B).
▪ In relation to ICT service A, the ICT service supply
chain is composed by one ICT third-party service
provider, ICT third-party service provider X, which
will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the template. ICT third-
party service provider X is the direct ICT third-
party service provider.
▪ In relation to ICT service B, the ICT service supply
chain is composed by two ICT third-party service
providers:
(i) ICT third-party service provider X,
which will be given ‘rank’ 1 in the
template. ICT third-party service
provider X is the direct ICT third-party
service provider.
EN
69
EN
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
(ii) ICT third-party service provider Y,
which will be given ‘rank’ 2 in the
template. ICT third-party service
provider Y is a subcontractor.
All ICT third-party service providers belonging to the
same ICT service supply chain share the same
‘contractual arrangement reference number’ as
referred in template RT.02.01 and ICT service
identifier as referred in template RT.07.01.
RT.05.03 Alternative ICT Objective of this template is to request financial entities
third-party service to report basic information on the alternative ICT third-
providers party service provider identified as alternative
providers according to Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and
the [Draft RTS on specify the detailed content of the
policy in relation to the contractual arrangements on the
use of ICT services supporting critical or important
functions provided by ICT third-party service providers
as mandated by Regulation (EU) 2022/2554], either
already under contract or only considered by the
financial entity.
In case the direct ICT third-party service provider is
an ICT intra-group service providers, financial entities
shall not report ‘alternative direct ICT third-party
service providers’.
RT.06.01 Functions Objective of this template is to identify and provide
identification information on the functions of the financial entities in
the scope of sub-consolidation or consolidation.
Within the information to be provided within this
template, financial entity maintaining the register of
Information shall include a unique identifier, the
‘function identifier’ for each combination of a
financial entity LEI, licenced activity and function.
Example: a financial entity which operates under two
licensed activities (say, activity A and activity B) will
identify two unique ‘function identifiers’ for the same
function X (e.g. Sales) performed for activity A and
activity B.
EN
70
EN
Template Template Name Short Description
Code
RT.07.01 ICT services Objective of this template is to identify through the
identification creation of a ‘ICT service identifier’ the ICT services
provided by ICT third-party service providers to the
‘entities making use of the ICT services’ when the
ICT service is not listed in Annex III.
RT.08.01 Assessments of the Objective of this template is to capture several
ICT services information in relation to the risk assessment on the
ICT services (e.g. substitutability, date of last audit,
etc.).
RT99.01 Definitions from Objective of this template is to capture entity-internal
Entities making use explanations, meanings and definitions of the closed
of the ICT Services set of indicators used in the register of information.
For example, in template RT.08.01 financial entities
shall provide an indication of the impact of
discontinuation of the ICT services by using a closed
set of options (low, medium, high). In template
RT99.01 the financial entity needs to specify the
meaning of those options.
RT99.02 List of financial Objective of this template is to list all the financial
entities within the entities within the scope of sub-consolidation and
scope of sub- consolidation .
consolidation and
consolidation
EN
71
EN
Part 2
Template-specific instructions
–
1. Instructions to fill in template RT.01.02 —Financial entity maintaining the register of information
Fill-in
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Option
RT.01.02.0010 LEI of the financial entity Alphanumerical Identify the financial entity maintaining the Register on Information Mandatory
maintaining the using the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric
the register of code based on the ISO 17442 standard valid and active at the date of
i nformation last update of the Register of information (RT.01.02.0050).
RT.01.02.0020 Name of the financial Alphanumerical Legal name of the financial entity maintaining the register of Mandatory
entity maintaining information.
the register of
information
RT.01.02.0030 Country of the financial Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country where the Mandatory
entity maintaining license or the registration of the financial entity maintaining the
the Register of Register on Information has been issued.
information
RT.01.02.0040 Type of financial entity Closed set of Identify the type of financial entity using one of the options in the Mandatory
maintaining options following closed list:
the register of
information 1. credit institutions;
2. payment institutions, including payment institutions exempted
pursuant to Directive (EU) 2015/2366;
3. account information service providers;
4. electronic money institutions, including electronic money
institutions exempted pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC;
EN EN
72
Fill-in
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Option
5. investment firms;
6. crypto-asset service providers as authorised under a Regulation of
the European Parliament and of the Council on markets in crypto-
assets, and amending Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No
1095/2010 and Directives 2013/36/EU and (EU) 2019/1937 (‘the
Regulation on markets in crypto-assets’) and issuers of asset-
referenced tokens;
7. central securities depositories;
8. central counterparties;
9. trading venues;
10. trade repositories;
11. managers of alternative investment funds;
12. management companies;
13. data reporting service providers;
14. insurance and reinsurance undertakings;
15. insurance intermediaries, reinsurance intermediaries and ancillary
insurance intermediaries;
16. institutions for occupational retirement provision;
17. credit rating agencies;
18. administrators of critical benchmarks;
19. crowdfunding service providers;
20. securitisation repositories.
21. Other financial entity
22. Non-financial entity: ICT intra-group service provider
23. Non-financial entity: Other
RT.01.02.0050 Date of last update Date Identify the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code of the date of the last Mandatory
update made on the Register of information.
RT.01.02.0060 Currency Currency Identify the ISO 4217 alphabetic code of the currency used for the Mandatory
preparation of the group or sub-group’s financial statements
EN EN
73
–
2. Instructions to fill in template RT.02.01 — Contractual Arrangements – General Information
Financial entities shall identify a ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ in relation to each contractual arrangement in scope of the register of
information. In case the ICT third-party service provider is making use of subcontractors, financial entities shall not include in the register of information
a ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ for the arrangements between the ICT third-party service providers and their subcontractors.
The ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ shall refer to the following type of contractual arrangements:
i. any kind of standalone arrangements.
ii. any kind of ‘overarching or framework arrangements’ such as master and framework arrangements;
iii. any kind of ‘subsequent or associated arrangements’ such as implementing arrangements, subservice arrangements, amendments, order forms;
The contract reference number does not refer to any kind of service level agreement subordinated to any of the above-mentioned types of contractual
arrangements.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.01.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical Identify the contractual arrangement between the group Mandatory
arrangement subsidiaries and the direct ICT third-party service provider.
reference number
The contractual arrangement reference number is the internal
reference number of the contractual arrangement assigned by the
financial entity.
The contractual arrangement reference number shall be unique
and consistent over time at entity, sub-consolidated and
consolidated level, where applicable.
The contractual arrangement reference number shall be used
consistently across all templates of the register of information
when referring to the same contractual arrangement.
EN EN
74
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.01.0020 Type of Closed set of Identify the type of contractual arrangement by using one of the Mandatory
contractual options options in the following closed list:
arrangement 1. Standalone arrangement
2. Overarching arrangement
3. Subsequent or associated arrangement
RT.02.01.0030 Overarching Alphanumerical Not applicable if the contractual arrangement is the ‘overarching Mandatory
contractual contractual arrangement’ or a ‘standalone arrangement’. In the
arrangement other cases, report the contractual arrangement reference number
reference number of the overarching arrangement, which shall be equal to value as
reported in the column RT.02.01.0010 when reporting the
overarching contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0041 Annual expense or Monetary Annual expense or estimated cost (or intragroup transfer) of the Mandatory
estimated cost of ICT service arrangement for the past year.
the contractual
arrangement for The annual expense or estimated cost shall be expressed in the
the past year currency reported in RT.01.02.0060.
In case of an overarching arrangement with subsequent or
associated arrangements, the sum of the annual expenses or
estimated costs reported for the overarching arrangement and the
subsequent or associated arrangements should be equal to the total
expenses or estimated costs for the overall contractual
arrangement. This means, there should be no repetition or
duplication of annual expenses or estimated costs. The following
cases should be reflected:
(a) if the annual expenses or estimate costs are not
determined at the level of the overarching arrangement
(i.e. they are 0), the annual expenses or estimated costs
EN EN
75
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
should be reported at the level of each subsequent or
associated arrangements.
(b) if the annual expenses or estimated costs cannot be
reported for each of the subsequent or associated
arrangements, the total annual expense or estimated cost
should be reported at the level of the overarching
arrangement.
(c) if there are annual expenses or estimated costs related
to each level of the arrangement, i.e. overarching and
subsequent or associated, and this information is
available, the annual expenses or estimated costs shall be
reported without duplication at each level of the
contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0042 Budget of the Monetary Budget or estimated cost or budget of the contractual arrangement Mandatory
contractual for the upcoming year.
arrangement for
the upcoming year The annual expense or estimated cost shall be expressed in the
currency reported in RT.01.02.0060.
In case of an overarching arrangement with subsequent or
associated arrangements, the sum of the budget reported for the
overarching arrangement and the subsequent or associated
arrangements should be equal to the total budget for the overall
contractual arrangement. This means, there should be no
repetition or duplication of budget. The following cases should be
reflected:
EN EN
76
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
(a) if the budget is not determined at the level of the
overarching arrangement (i.e. they are 0), the budget
should be reported at the level of each subsequent or
associated arrangements.
(b) if the budget cannot be reported for each of the
subsequent or associated arrangements, the total budget
should be reported at the level of the overarching
arrangement.
(c) if there is a budget related to each level of the arrangement,
i.e. overarching and subsequent or associated, and this
information is available, the budget shall be reported without
duplication at each level of the contractual arrangement.
RT.02.01.0050 Approval from [Yes/No] Indicate if the specific arrangement was subject to management Mandatory
the management body approval as defined in Article 3(30) of Regulation (EU)
body 2022/2554 using one of the options in the following closed list:
1. Yes
2. No
RT.02.01.0060 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory
third-party
service provider Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
contractual arrangement by reporting the LEI
RT.02.01.0071 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory
identify the ICT
third-party Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
service provider contractual arrangement by reporting the other code
RT.02.01.0072 Country of Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory
issuance of the
EN EN
77
Column Code Column Name Type Fill -in Instruction Fill-in Option
other code to Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
identify the ICT contractual arrangement by reporting the country of issuance of
third-party the other code
service provider
RT.02.01.0073 Type of other code Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory
to identify options
the ICT third- Identify the direct ICT third-party service provider that signed the
party service contractual arrangement by reporting the type of other code
provider
–
EN EN
78
3. Instructions to fill in template RT.02.02 — Contractual Arrangements – Specific information
Financial entities shall maintain this template at the maximum level of granularity possible. In order to do so, in case the contractual arrangement includes
multiple ICT services supporting multiple functions, use as many rows as the elements in the matrix resulting combining the ICT services covered in the
contractual arrangement and the financial entity’s functions.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.02.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical A s reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
arrangement
reference number
RT.02.02.0020 Function identifier Alphanumerical A s defined by the financial entity in RT.06.01.0010 Mandatory
RT.02.02.0030 ICT services Alphanumerical A s defined by the financial entity in RT.07.01.0010 Mandatory
identifier
RT.02.02.0040 Start date of the Date Identify the date of entry into force of the contractual arrangement as Mandatory
contractual stipulated in the contractual arrangement using the ISO 8601 (yyyy–
arrangement mm–dd) code
RT.02.02.0050 Date of next Date Identify the date of contract renewal as stipulated in the contractual Mandatory
renewal of the arrangement or as planned by the parties using the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–
contractual dd) code. If the contractual arrangement is indefinite, it shall be filled in
arrangement with ‘9999-12-31’.
RT.02.02.0060 End date of the Date Identify the end date as stipulated in the contractual arrangement using Mandatory
contractual the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code. If the contractual arrangement is
arrangement indefinite, it shall be filled in with ‘9999-12-31’. If the contractual
arrangement has been terminated on a date different than the end date,
this shall be filled in with the termination date.
RT.02.02.0070 Reason of the Closed set of In case the contractual arrangement has been terminated or it is ended, Mandatory if
termination or options identify the reason of the termination or ending of the contractual the contractual
ending of the arrangements using one of the options in the following closed list: arrangement is
contractual terminated
arrangement
EN EN
79
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
1. Termination not for cause. The contractual arrangement has
expired/ended and has not been renewed by any of the party;
2. Termination for cause. The contractual arrangement has been
terminated, being the ICT third-party service provider in a breach
of applicable law, regulations or contractual provisions
3. Termination for cause. The contractual arrangement has been
terminated, due to impediments of the ICT third-party service
provider capable of altering the supported function are identified;
4. Termination for cause: The contractual arrangement has been
terminated due to weaknesses of the ICT third-party provider
regarding the management and security of sensitive data or
information of any of the counterparty;
5. Termination following a request by any Authority. The
contractual arrangement has been terminated following a request
by a Competent Authority.
6. Other. The contractual arrangement has been terminated by any
of the party for any reason different from the above.
RT.02.02.0080 Notice period for Integer Identify the notice period for terminating the contractual arrangement by Mandatory
the financial entity the financial entity in a business-as-usual case. The notice period shall
be expressed as number of calendar days from the receipt of the
counterparty of the request to terminate the ICT service.
RT.02.02.0090 Notice period for Integer Identify the notice period for terminating contractual arrangement by the Mandatory
the ICT third-party direct ICT third-party service provider in a business-as-usual case. The
service provider notice period shall be expressed as number of calendar days from the
receipt of the counterparty of the request to terminate the ICT service.
EN EN
80
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.02.0100 Country of the Country Identify the country of the governing law of the contractual arrangement Mandatory
governing law of using the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code.
the contractual
arrangement
RT.02.02.0110 Country of Country Identify the country of provision of the ICT services using the ISO 3166– Mandatory
provision of the 1 alpha–2 code.
ICT services
RT.02.02.0121 Storage of data [Yes/No] Is the ICT service related to (or foresees) storage of data? Mandatory
One of the options provided in the following closed list:
1. Yes
2. No
RT.02.02.0122 Location of the data Country Identify the country of location of the data at rest (storage) using the ISO Mandatory if
at rest (storage) 3 166–1 alpha–2 code. ’Yes’ is
reported in
RT.02.02.0121
RT.02.02.0123 Location of Country Identify the country of location of management of the data (processing) Mandatory if
management of the using the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code. the service is
data (processing) based on or
foresees data
processing
RT.02.02.0130 Sensitiveness of the Closed set of Identify the level of sensitiveness of the data stored or processed by the Mandatory if
data stored by the options ICT third-party service provider using one of the options provided in the the ICT third-
ICT third-party following closed list: party service
service provider provider stores
1. Low data
2. Medium
EN EN
81
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
3. High
The most sensitive data take precedence: e.g. if both ‘Medium’ and
‘High’ apply, then ‘High’ shall be selected.
RT.02.02.0140 Are customers data [Yes/No] Identify if customers data is stored or processed by the ICT third-party Mandatory if
stored or processed service provider using one of the options in the following closed list: the ICT third-
by the ICT third- party service
party service 1. Yes provider
provider? 2. No processes or
stores data
RT.02.02.0150 Level of reliance on Closed set of One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory if
the ICT service options the function
supporting the 1. Not significant supported is
critical or 2. Low reliance: in case of disruption of the services, the supported critical or
important function. functions would not be significantly impacted (no interruption, no important
important damage) or disruption can be resolved quickly and with
minimal impact on the function/s supported
3. Material reliance: in case of disruption of the services, the supported
functions would be significantly impacted if the disruption lasts more
than few minutes/few hours, and the disruption may engender damages,
but still manageable
4. Full reliance: in case of disruption of the services, the supported
functions would be immediately and severely interrupted/damaged, for a
long period
EN EN
82
4. Instructions to fill in template RT.02.03 — List of intra-group contractual arrangements and links with contractual arrangements with ICT
third-party service provider which are not part of the same group
Template RT.02.03 aims at identifying entities from same contracting chains using the intra-group contractual reference numbers in cases where the ICT
service supply chain contains ICT intra-group service providers, i.e. when in case at least one of the ICT third-party service provider in the ICT service
supply chain is an entity belonging to the same group of the entity making use of the ICT services.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.03.0010 LEI of the entity Alphanumerical Identify the entity making use of the ICT service(s) using the Legal Mandatory
making use of the Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the
ICT service(s) ISO 17442 standard valid and active at the date of last update if the
contract is not terminated or cancelled.
RT.02.03.0020 LEI of the entity, in Alphanumerical Identify the entity, in the same sub-consolidation or consolidation Mandatory if
the same sub- scope, providing ICT service(s) to the entity making use of the ICT the entity
consolidation or service(s) using the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha- providing ICT
consolidation scope, numeric code based on the ISO 17442 standard valid and active at the services is in
providing ICT date of last update if the contract is not terminated or cancelled. the same sub-
service(s) to the entity consolidation
making use of the or
ICT service(s) consolidation
scope of the
entity making
use of the ICT
services.
RT.02.03.0030 Contractual Alphanumerical Contractual arrangement reference number between the entity reported Mandatory
arrangement in RT.02.03.0010 and the entity reported in RT.02.03.0020
reference number
The contractual arrangement reference number shall be unique and
consistent over time and across all the group.
RT.02.03.0040 LEI of the direct ICT Alphanumerical Identify the ICT third-party service provider using the Legal Entity Mandatory if
third-party service Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the ISO the ICT third-
party service
EN EN
83
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
provider of the entity 17442 standard valid and active at the date of last update if the contract provider is a
in RT.02.03.0020 is not terminated or cancelled. legal person
excluding
individuals
acting in a
business
capacity
RT.02.03.0051 Other code to identify Alphanumerical Other code used to identify the ICT third-party service provider or Mandatory if
the direct ICT third- subcontractor of the entity in RT.02.03.0020 the LEI is not
party service available and
provider of the entity the ICT third-
in RT.02.03.0020 party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.02.03.0052 Country of issuance Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of issuance of the Mandatory if
of the other code to other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider of the entity RT.02.03.0051
identify the direct in RT.02.03.0020 is reported
ICT third-party
service provider of
the entity in
RT.02.03.0020
RT.02.03.0053 Type of other code to Closed set of Type of other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider of Mandatory if
identify the direct options the entity in RT.02.03.0020 RT.02.03.0051
ICT third-party is reported
service provider of One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
the entity in
RT.02.03.0020 1. Corporate registration number
2. VAT number
3. Passport Number
4. National Identity Number
EN EN
84
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.02.03.0060 Contractual Alphanumerical Contractual arrangement reference number between the entity in Mandatory
arrangement RT.02.03.0020 and its direct ICT third-party service provider(s) as
reference number reported by the entity in RT.02.03.0020 in its register of information on
between the entity in a solo or sub-consolidated level.
RT.02.03.0020 and its
direct ICT third- In case the direct ICT third-party service provider belongs to the sub-
party service consolidation or consolidation scope, it shall be reported in
provider(s) RT.02.03.0020
–
EN EN
85
5. Instructions to fill in template RT.03.01 — Entities signing the Contractual Arrangements for receiving ICT service(s) or on behalf of the
entities making use of the ICT service(s)
The entity signing the contractual arrangement is not necessarily a financial entity nor the entity making use of the ICT services provided by the ICT
third-party service provider.
For example, the entity signing the contractual arrangement referred above could be an ICT intra-group service provider, a financial and/or non-financial
entity belonging to the same group of the financial entities making use of the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service provider.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.03.01.0010 Contractual reference Alphanumerical As reported in RT.02.02.0010 Mandatory
number
Identify the contractual reference number signed by the entity
RT.03.01.0020 LEI code of the entity Alphanumerical Identify the entity signing the contractual arrangement using the Legal Mandatory
signing the Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the
contractual ISO 17442 standard valid and active at the date of last update if the
arrangement c ontract is not terminated or cancelled.
RT.03.01.0030 Name of the entity Alphanumerical Legal name of the entity signing the contractual arrangement with the Mandatory
signing the ICT third-party service provider(s) and that represents the entities that
contractual make use of the ICT service(s).
arrangement Branches shall be reported with the name of their respective head office.
Only one single entity shall be reported per row.
RT.03.01.0040 Country of the entity Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country in which the entity Mandatory
signing the contract is registered.
RT.03.01.0050 Type of the entity Closed set of One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
signing the contract options
1. credit institutions;
2. payment institutions, including payment institutions exempted
pursuant to Directive (EU) 2015/2366;
3. account information service providers;
4. electronic money institutions, including electronic money institutions
exempted pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC;
EN EN
86
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
5. investment firms;
6. crypto-asset service providers as authorised under a Regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on markets in crypto-assets and
amending Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010 and
Directives 2013/36/EU and (EU) 2019/1937 (‘the Regulation on markets
in crypto-assets’) and issuers of asset-referenced tokens;
7. central securities depositories;
8. central counterparties;
9. trading venues;
10. trade repositories;
11. managers of alternative investment funds;
12. management companies;
13. data reporting service providers;
14. insurance and reinsurance undertakings;
15. insurance intermediaries, reinsurance intermediaries and ancillary
insurance intermediaries;
16. institutions for occupational retirement provision;
17. credit rating agencies;
18. administrators of critical benchmarks;
19. crowdfunding service providers;
20. securitisation repositories.
21. Other financial entity
22. Non-financial entity: ICT intra-group service provider
2 3. Non-financial entity: Other
EN EN
87
6. Instructions to fill in template RT.04.01 — Entities making use of the ICT services
All the financial entities making use of the ICT services provided by ICT third-party providers in the scope of sub-consolidation and consolidation shall
be reported in this template. In case an entity, in scope of the sub-consolidation or consolidation, is not making use of an ICT service provided by an ICT
third-party provider, this entity shall not be reported in this template.
Column Code Column Name Type Fil-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.04.01.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
reference number
Identify the contractual reference number in relation to the
entity making use of the ICT services provided
RT.04.01.0020 LEI of the financial Alphanumerical 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the ISO 17442 Mandatory
entity making use of standard valid and active at the reporting date
the ICT service(s)
RT.04.01.0030 Name of the Alphanumerical Name of the financial entity that makes use of the ICT Mandatory
financial entity services. In case of a branch, the name of the head office
making use of the shall be reported.
ICT service(s)
RT.04.01.0040 Country of the Country Country in which the global operating headquarters of Mandatory
financial entity service provider are located with alpha-2 country codes to
making use of the be used.
ICT service(s)
RT.04.01.0050 Type of the financial Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be Mandatory
entity making use of used:
the ICT service(s)
1. credit institutions;
2. payment institutions, including payment institutions
exempted pursuant to Directive (EU) 2015/2366;
3. account information service providers;
4. electronic money institutions, including electronic
money institutions exempted pursuant to Directive
2009/110/EC;
EN EN
88
Column Code Column Name Type Fil-in Instruction Fill-in Option
5. investment firms;
6. crypto-asset service providers as authorised under a
Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
on markets in crypto-assets and amending Regulations
(EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010 and
Directives 2013/36/EU and (EU) 2019/1937 (‘the
Regulation on markets in crypto-assets’) and issuers of
asset-referenced tokens;
7. central securities depositories;
8. central counterparties;
9. trading venues;
10. trade repositories;
11. managers of alternative investment funds;
12. management companies;
13. data reporting service providers;
14. insurance and reinsurance undertakings;
15. insurance intermediaries, reinsurance intermediaries
and ancillary insurance intermediaries;
16. institutions for occupational retirement provision;
17. credit rating agencies;
18. administrators of critical benchmarks;
19. crowdfunding service providers;
20. securitisation repositories.
21. Other financial entity
22. Non-financial entity: ICT intra-group service provider
2 3. Non-financial entity: Other
RT.04.01.0060 Value of total assets - Monetary Monetary value of total assets of the entity making use of Mandatory
of the financial entity the ICT services as reported in the entity’s annual financial
making use of the statement of the year before the date of the last update of
ICT service(s) the register of information.
EN EN
89
Column Code Column Name Type Fil-in Instruction Fill-in Option
Refer to Annex V for the approach to be followed when
filling in this column.
RT.04.01.0070 Value of the other Monetary Monetary value of the other financial indicator of the entity Mandatory
financial indicator of making use of the ICT services as reported in the entity’s
the financial entity annual financial statement of the year before the date of the
making use of the last update of the register of information.
ICT service(s)
Refer to Annex V for the approach to be followed when
filling in this column.
–
–
EN EN
90
7. Instructions to fill in template RT.05.01 — ICT third-party service providers
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.01.0010 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical Identify the ICT third-party service provider using the Legal Entity Mandatory if
third-party Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the ISO the ICT third-
service provider 17442 standard valid and active at the date of last update if the party service
c ontract is not terminated or cancelled. provider is a
legal person
RT.05.01.0021 Other code to Alphanumerical Other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider Mandatory if
identify the ICT the LEI is not
third-party available and
service provider ICT third-party
service provider
is not a legal
person
RT.05.01.0022 Country of Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of issuance of Mandatory if
issuance of the the other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider RT.05.01.0021
other code to is reported
identify the ICT
third-party
service provider
RT.05.01.0023 Type of other Closed set of Type of the other code to identify the ICT third-party service Mandatory if
code to identify options provider RT.05.01.0021
the ICT third- is reported
party service One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
provider
1. Corporate registration number
2. VAT number
3. Passport Number
4. National Identity Number
EN EN
91
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.01.0030 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical Legal name of the ICT third-party service provider Mandatory
third-party
service provider
RT.05.01.0040 Type of person of Closed set of One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
the ICT third- options
party service 1. Legal person
provider 2. Individual acting in a business capacity
Providing the LEI is mandatory for legal person including
individuals acting in a business capacity
RT.05.01.0050 Country of the Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country in which the Mandatory
ICT third-party global operating headquarters of ICT third-party service provider are
service provider’s located.
headquarters
RT.05.01.0060 Registered Alphanumerical Registered address of the ICT third-party service provider as Optional
address of the stipulated in the contractual arrangement.
ICT third-party
service provider
RT.05.01.0070 Business alliance Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
1. The ICT third-party service provider is not part of an alliance;
2. The ICT third-party service provider is part of a group;
3. The ICT third-party service provider is a joint-venture;
4. The ICT third-party service provider is a member of an association
or a partnership of firms;
5. Other case where the ICT third-party service provider is connected
to other legal entities.
RT.05.01.0080 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical Name of the ultimate parent undertaking of the ICT third-party Mandatory
third-party service provider.
EN EN
92
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
service provider’s
ultimate parent In case the ICT third-party service provider is a joint venture where
undertaking the owners have equal part, all the owners shall be reported using
separate rows.
In case the ICT third-party service provider is a member of an
association or a partnership of firms, the name of the coordinating
firm shall be reported.
If the ICT third-party service provider is the ultimate parent
undertaking, ‘Not applicable’ shall be reported.
RT.05.01.0090 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical Identify the ICT third-party service provider's ultimate parent Mandatory if
third-party undertaking using the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, RT.05.01.0080
service provider’s alpha-numeric code based on the ISO 17442 standard valid and is reported
ultimate parent active at the date of last update if the contract is not terminated or
undertaking cancelled.
RT.05.01.0101 Other code to Alphanumerical Other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider’s ultimate Mandatory if
identify the ICT parent undertaking RT.05.01.0080
third-party is reported
service provider’s
ultimate parent
undertaking
RT.05.01.0102 Country of Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of issuance of Mandatory if
issuance of the the other code to identify the ICT third-party service provider's RT.05.01.0101
other code to ultimate parent undertaking is reported
identify the ICT
third-party
service provider’s
ultimate parent
undertaking
EN EN
93
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.01.0103 Name of the Closed set of options Name of the identification system of the other code to identify the Mandatory if
identification ICT third-party service provider's ultimate parent undertaking RT.05.01.0101
system of the is reported
other code to One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
identify the ICT
third-party 1. Corporate registration number
service provider’s 2. VAT number
ultimate parent 3. Passport Number
undertaking 4. National Identity Number
RT.05.01.0110 Country of the Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country in which the Mandatory
ICT third-party parent undertaking's headquarters are located
service provider
ultimate parent
undertaking's
headquarters
RT.05.01.0120 Is the ICT third- [Yes/No] One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
party service
provider an ICT 1. Yes
intra-group 2. No
service provider?
EN EN
94
8. Instructions to fill in template RT.05.02 — ICT service supply chains
This template aims at identifying and linking one to each other the ICT third-party service providers part of the same ICT service supply chain.
The ICT service supply chain shall include, where applicable:
(iv) all ICT intragroup service providers;
(v) all ICT third-party service providers supporting a critical or important function or material parts thereof;
(vi) in case a ICT intragroup service provider makes use of subcontractors to provide their ICT services to the financial entity, at least the first
extra-group ICT third party service provider even if the ICT services provided do not support a critical or important function or material part
thereof.
All ICT third-party service providers belonging to the same ICT service supply chain share:
(iii) the same ‘contractual arrangement reference number’ as referred in template RT.02.01;
(iv) the same ‘ICT service identifier’ as referred in template RT.07.01;
Each ICT third-party service providers belonging to the same ICT service supply is assigned with a ‘rank’ (RT.05.02.0040) to identify its position within
the ICT service supply chain. In case multiple ICT third-party service providers have the same position within the same ICT service supply chain, they
will be assigned with the same ‘rank’. The direct ICT third-party service providers are therefore at rank 1. If the rank is higher than 1, the ICT third-party
service providers are subcontractors.
In order to link one to each other the ICT third party service providers belonging to the same ICT service supply chain, for each ICT subcontractor (i.e.
where the ‘rank’ is higher than 1) it is needed to identify the ICT third party service provider recipient of its subcontracted services. The identification
of the ICT third party service provider recipient of subcontracted services shall be carry out by using the columns from RT.05.02.0050 to RT.05.02.0070.
For each ICT service supply chain (i.e., a combination of a "contractual arrangement reference number" and an "ICT service identifier"), if there are
multiple ICT third-party service providers receiving subcontracted services, all of these service providers shall be reported in separate rows in the
template. The same logic applies at each rank of the ICT service supply chain.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.02.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
reference number
RT.05.02.0020 ICT service Alphanumerical As reported in RT.07.01.0010 Mandatory
identifier
EN EN
95
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.05.02.0030 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory if
third-party service the ICT third-
provider party service
provider is a
legal person
RT.05.02.0041 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory if
identify the ICT the LEI is not
third-party service available and
provider the ICT third-
party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.05.02.0042 Country of issuance Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory if
of the other code to the LEI is not
identify the ICT available and
third-party service the ICT third-
provider party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.05.02.0043 Type of other code Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory if
to identify options the LEI is not
the ICT third-party available and
service provider the ICT third-
party service
provider is not
a legal person
RT.05.02.0050 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0030 Mandatory
third-party service
provider
RT.05.02.0060 Rank Integer If the ICT third-party service provider is signing the contractual Mandatory
arrangement with the financial entity, it is considered as a direct ICT
EN EN
96
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
third-party service provider and the ‘rank’ to be reported shall be 1;
If the ICT third-party service provider is signing the contract with the
direct ICT third-party service provider, it is considered as a
subcontractor and the ‘rank’ to be reported shall be 2;
The same logic apply to all the following subcontractors by
incrementing the ‘rank’ until the last contractor in the ICT service
supply chain.
In case multiple ICT third-party service providers have the same ‘rank’
in the ICT service supply chain, financial entities shall report the same
‘rank’ for all those ICT third-party service providers.
RT.05.02.0070 LEI of the recipient Alphanumerical ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is a direct ICT Mandatory
of sub-contracted third-party service provider i.e. at ‘rank’ r = 1 (RT.05.01.0020); Not applicable
ICT services for rank 1
If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1,
indicate the ‘LEI of the recipient of sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’
r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT service (even partially) to the ICT
third-party service provider at ‘rank’ r=n.
To indicate the 'LEI of the recipient of subcontracted services' use the
Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on
the ISO 17442 standard
RT.05.02.0081 Other code to Alphanumerical ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at contracting Mandatory if
identify the rank r = 1 (RT.05.01.0020); the LEI is not
recipient of sub- available and
contracted ICT If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1, the ICT third-
services indicate the ‘Other code to identify the recipient of sub-contracted party service
service’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT service (even provider is not
partially) to the ICT third-party service provider at ‘rank’ r=n. a legal
EN EN
97
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
personNot
applicable for
rank 1
RT.05.02.0082 Country of issuance Country ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = 1 Mandatory if
of other code to (RT.05.01.0020); RT.05.02.0081
identify the is reported
recipient of sub- If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1, Not applicable
contracted ICT indicate the ‘Country of issuance of other code to identify the recipient for rank 1
services of sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT
service (even partially) to the ICT third-party service provider at ‘rank’
r=n.
To indicate the ‘Country of issuance of other code to identify the
recipient of sub-contracted services’, use the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code
of the country of issuance of the other code to identify the recipient of
s ub-contracted services.
RT.05.02.0083 Type of other code Closed set of ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = 1 Mandatory if
to identify options (RT.05.01.0020); RT.05.02.0081
the recipient of sub- is reported
contracted ICT If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1, Not applicable
services indicate the ‘Type of other code to identify the ICT third-party service for rank 1
provider recipient of sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that
subcontracted the ICT service (even partially) to the ICT third-party
service provider at ‘rank’ r=n.
To indicate the type, one of the options in the following closed list shall
be used:
1. Corporate registration number
2. VAT number
EN EN
98
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
3. Passport Number
4. National Identity Number
RT.05.02.0090 Name of the Alphanumerical ‘Not applicable' if the ICT third-party service provider is at contracting Mandatory
recipient of sub- rank r = 1 (RT.05.01.0020); Not applicable
contracted ICT for rank 1
services If the ICT third-party service provider is at ‘rank’ r = n where n>1,
indicate the ‘Name of the ICT third-party service provider recipient of
sub-contracted services’ at ‘rank’ r=n-1 that subcontracted the ICT
service (even partially) to the ICT third-party service provider at ‘rank’
r=n.
EN EN
99
9. Instructions to fill in template RT.05.03 — Alternative direct ICT third-party service providers
When supporting an important or critical function, this template aims at listing alternative direct ICT third-party service providers (not the subcontractors)
identified by the financial entity.
In case the direct ICT third-party service provider is an ICT intra-group service providers, financial entities shall not report ‘alternative direct ICT third-
party service providers’.
The identification of an alternative service provider is part of the definition of the exit strategy of financial entities from ICT third-party service providers
supporting critical or important functions. In principle, for each ICT third-party service provider supporting a critical or important function, the assessment
to identify an alternative service provider shall be performed.
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT05.03.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT02.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
arrangement reported in
reference Identify the contractual reference number where the ICT third- RT.08.01.0100
number party service providers have been identified by the financial
entity making use of the ICT services provided when at least a
c ritical or important function is supported
RT05.03.0020 Function Alphanumerical As reported in RT06.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
identifier reported in
Function identifier to identify the critical or important function RT.08.01.0100
supported by the ICT service provided
RT05.03.0030 ICT service Alphanumerical As reported in RT07.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
identifier reported in
ICT service identifier to identify the ICT service provided RT.08.01.0100
RT05.03.0040 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
third-party reported in
service RT.08.01.0100
provider
EN EN
100
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT05.03.0051 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory if the LEI is
identify the not available and if
ICT third- ‘Yes’ is reported in
party service RT.08.01.0100
provider
RT05.03.0052 Country of Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory if
issuance of the RT05.03.0051 is
other code to reported
identify the
ICT third-
party service
provider
RT05.03.0053 Type of other Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory if
code to identify options RT05.03.0051 is
the ICT third- reported
party service
provider
RT05.03.0060 Alternative Alphanumerical Legal name of the alternative ICT third-party service provider Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
ICT third- reported in
party service RT.08.01.0100
provider name
RT05.03.0070 Alternative Country Identify the ISO 3166–1 alpha–2 code of the country of the Mandatory if ‘Yes’ is
ICT third- alternative ICT third-party service provider reported in
party service RT.08.01.0100
provider
country
EN EN
101
10. Instructions to fill in template RT.06.01 — Functions identification
This template aims at identifying and providing information on the functions of the financial entity according to the financial entity’s internal organisation.
Each combination of the three following items shall have a unique function identifier assigned:
i. ‘LEI of the financial entity making use of the ICT service(s)’ column RT.06.01.0030
ii. ‘Licenced activity’ column RT.06.01.0040
iii. ‘Function name’ column RT.06.01.0051
Financial entities shall use as many rows as the elements in the matrix resulting combining the two items above to fill-in this template.
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.06.01.0010 Function Alphanumerical The function identifier shall be composed by the letter F (capital Mandatory
Identifier letter) followed by an integer (e.g. “F1” for the 1st function
identifier and “Fn” for the nth function identifier with “n” being an
integer).
Each combination between ‘Function name’ (RT.06.01.0051) and
‘Licenced activity’ (RT.06.01.0040) shall have a unique function
identifier
Example: a financial entity which operates under two licensed
activities (say, activity A and activity B) will identify two unique
‘function identifiers’ for the same function X (e.g. Sales)
performed for activity A and activity B.
RT.06.01.0020 Licenced Closed set of options Name of the licenced activities as identified in Annex III for the Mandatory
activity different type of financial entities.
In case the function is not linked to a registered or licenced
activity, ‘support functions’ shall be reported.
RT.06.01.0030 Function name Alphanumerical Function name according to the financial entity’s internal Mandatory
organisation.
RT.06.01.0040 LEI of the Alphanumerical As reported in RT.04.01.0020 Mandatory
entity making
EN EN
102
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
use of the ICT 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the ISO 17442
service(s) standard valid and active at the reporting date. In case multiple
entities make use of the ICT services, please add an additional line
entry for each entity.
RT.06.01.0051 Nature of the Closed set of options Mandatory
One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
financial entity
making use of 1. The entity making use of the ICT service(s) is a branch
the ICT
2. The entity making use of the ICT service(s) is not a branch
service(s)
RT.06.01.0052 Name of the Alphanumerical Mandatory in
Name of the branch
branch case “the entity
making use of
the ICT
service(s) is a
branch“ is
selected in
RT.06.01.0031
RT.06.01.0053 Country of the Country Mandatory in
Country in which the branch is located with alpha-2 country codes
branch case “the entity
to be used.
making use of
the ICT
service(s) is a
branch“ is
selected in
RT.06.01.0031
RT.06.01.0061 Criticality or [Yes/No] Use this column to indicate whether the function is critical or Mandatory
importance important according to the financial entity’s assessment. One of
assessment the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Yes
EN EN
103
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
2. No
3. Assessment not performed
RT.06.01.0062 Reasons for Alphanumerical Brief explanation on the reasons to classify the function as critical Optional
criticality or or important (300 characters maximum)
importance
RT.06.01.0063 Date of the last Date Identify the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code of the date of the last Mandatory
assessment of assessment of criticality or importance in case the function is
criticality or supported by ICT services provided by ICT third-party service
importance providers.
In case the function’s assessment of criticality or importance is not
performed, it shall be filled in with ‘9999-12-31’
RT.06.01.0070 Function is [Yes/No] Use this column to indicate whether the function is considered Mandatory
considered time-critical according to the financial entity’s assessment. One of
time-critical the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Yes
2. No
3. Assessment not performed
RT.06.01.0080 Recovery time Integer In number of hours. If the recovery time objective is less than 1 Mandatory
objective of the hour, ‘1’ shall be reported. In case the recovery time objective of
function the function is not defined ‘0’ shall be reported.
RT.06.01.0090 Recovery point Integer In number of hours. If the recovery point objective is less than 1 Mandatory
objective of the hour, ‘1’ shall be reported. In case the recovery time objective of
function the function is not defined ‘0’ shall be reported.
RT.06.01.0100 Impact of Closed set of options Use this column to indicate the impact of discontinuing the Mandatory
discontinuing function according to the financial entity’s assessment. One of the
the function options in the following closed list shall be used
EN EN
104
Column Code Column Name Type Instruction Fill-in Option
1. Low
2. Medium
3. High
4. Assessment not performed
EN EN
105
11. Instructions to fill in template RT.07.01 — ICT services identification
Objective of this template is to identify through the creation of a ‘ICT service identifier’ the ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers
to the financial entity in case the ICT service is not listed in Annex III. If the ICT service is listed in Annex III, the ICT service identifier is the one
indicated in Annex III.
Each ICT service shall have a unique ‘ICT service identifier’ assigned.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.07.01.0010 ICT service Alphanumerical The ICT service identifier shall be composed by the letter S (capital Mandatory
identifier letter) followed by an integer (e.g. “S21” for the 21st ICT service
identifier and “Sn” for the nth ‘ICT services identifier’ with “n”
being an integer where n>20).
If the ICT service is listed in Annex IV the ICT service identifier is
the one indicated in Annex IV
RT.07.01.0021 Name of the ICT Alphanumerical Financial entities shall report the name of the ICT service in case it Mandatory
service i s not listed in Annex IV.
RT.07.01.0022 Description of Alphanumerical A brief (maximum 300 characters) description of the ICT service Mandatory
the ICT service provided, in case it is not listed in Annex IV, including the data that
provided are being processed and stored.
EN EN
106
12. Instructions to fill in template RT.08.01 — Assessment of the ICT services
When supporting an important or critical function, this template aims at further assessing the ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers
to the financial entity.
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.08.01.0010 Contractual Alphanumerical As reported in RT.02.01.0010 Mandatory
arrangement
reference
number
RT.08.01.0020 LEI of the ICT Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0010 Mandatory
third-party
service
provider
RT.08.01.0031 Other code to Alphanumerical As reported in RT.05.01.0021 Mandatory
identify the
ICT third-
party service
provider
RT.08.01.0032 Country of Country As reported in RT.05.01.0022 Mandatory
issuance of the
other code to
identify the
ICT third-
party service
provider
RT.08.01.0033 Type of other Closed set of As reported in RT.05.01.0023 Mandatory
code to identify options
the ICT third-
party service
provider
EN EN
107
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.08.01.0040 ICT service Alphanumerical A s reported in RT.07.01.0010 Mandatory
identifier
RT.08.01.0051 Substitutability Closed set of options Use this column to provide the results of the financial entity’s Mandatory
of the ICT assessment in relation to the degree of substitutability of the ICT
third-party third-party service provider to perform the specific ICT services
service supporting a critical or important function.
provider
One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Not substitutable
2. Highly complex substitutability
3. Medium complexity in terms of substitutability
4. Easily substitutable
RT.08.01.0052 Reason if the Closed set of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory in
ICT third- case “not
party service 1. The lack of real alternatives, even partial, due to the limited substitutable”
provider is number of ICT third-party service providers active on a specific or “highly
considered not market, or the market share of the relevant ICT third-party service complex
substitutable provider, or the technical complexity or sophistication involved, substitutability”
or difficult to including in relation to any proprietary technology, or the specific is selected in
be features of the ICT third-party service provider’s organisation or RT.08.01.0041
substitutable activity.
2. Difficulties in relation to partially or fully migrating the relevant
data and workloads from the relevant ICT third- party service
provider to another ICT third-party service provider or to
reintegrate them in the financial entity’s operations, due either to
significant financial costs, time or other resources that the
migration process may entail, or to increased ICT risk or other
operational risks to which the financial entity.
3. Both abovementioned reasons
EN EN
108
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.08.01.0060 Date of the last Date Use this column to provide the date of the last audit on the specific Mandatory
audit on the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service provider.
ICT third-
party service This column relates to audits conducted by:
provider (i) the internal audit department or any other additional
qualified personnel of the financial entity,
(ii) a joint team together with other clients of the same ICT
third-party service provider (“pooled audit”) or
(iii) a third party appointed by the supervised entity to audit
the service provider.
This column does not relate to the reception or reference date of
third-party certifications or internal audit reports of the ICT third-
party service provider, the annual monitoring date of the
arrangement by the financial entity or the date of review of the risk
assessment by the financial entity.
This column shall be used to report all types of audits performed
by any of the subjects listed above concerning fully or partially the
ICT services provided by the ICT third-party service provider.
To report the date, the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code shall be
used.
If no audit has been performed, it shall be filled in with ‘9999-12-
31’.
RT.08.01.0070 Existence of an [Yes/No] Use this column to report the existence of an exit plan from the Mandatory
exit plan ICT third-party service provider in relation to the specific ICT
service provided.
EN EN
109
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Yes
2. No
RT.08.01.0080 Possibility of Closed et of options One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
reintegration
of the 1. Easy
contracted ICT 2. Difficult
service 3. Highly complex
In case the ICT service is provided by a ICT third-party service
provider that is not an ICT intra-group service provider
RT.08.01.0090 Impact of Closed et of options Use this column to provide the impact for the financial entity of Mandatory
discontinuing discontinuing the ICT services provided by the ICT third-party
the ICT service provider according to the financial entity’s assessment.
services One of the options in the following closed list shall be used:
1. Low
2. Medium
3. High
4.Assessment not performed
RT.08.01.0100 Are there [Yes/No] One of the options in the following closed list shall be used: Mandatory
alternative
ICT third- 1. Yes
party service 2. No
providers
identified?
In principle, for each ICT third-party service provider supporting a
critical or important function, the assessment to identify an
alternative service provider shall be performed.
EN EN
110
13. Instructions to fill in template RT.99.01 — Definitions from Entities making use of the ICT Services
RT.99.01.C0010 RT.99.01.C0020 RT.99.01.C0030 RT.99.01.C0040
Column Code Column Name Option Description/Internal definition of the option
RT.99.01.R0010 1. Standalone arrangement
Type of
RT.99.01.R0020 2. Overarching arrangement
RT.02.01.0020 contractual
3. Subsequent or associated
RT.99.01.R0030 arrangement
arrangement
RT.99.01.R0040 Sensitiveness of 1. Low
RT.99.01.R0050
RT.02.02.0130
the data stored by 2. Medium
the ICT third-party
RT.99.01.R0060 3. High
service provider
RT.99.01.R0070 1. Low
Impact of
RT.99.01.R0080 2. Medium
RT.06.01.0090 discontinuing the
RT.99.01.R0090 3. High
function
RT.99.01.R0100 4. Assessment not performed
RT.99.01.R0110 1. Not substitutable
RT.99.01.R0120 Substitutability of 2. Highly complex substitutability
RT.08.01.0031 the ICT third-party 3. Medium complexity in terms of
RT.99.01.R0130
service provider substitutability
RT.99.01.R0140 4. Easily substitutable
RT.99.01.R0150 Possibility of 1. Easy
reintegration of the
RT.99.01.R0160
RT.08.01.0080
2. Difficult
contracted ICT
RT.99.01.R0170 3. Highly complex
service
RT.99.01.R0180 1. Low
Impact of
RT.99.01.R0190 2. Medium
RT.08.01.0090 discontinuing the
RT.99.01.R0200 3. High
ICT services
RT.99.01.R0210 4.Assessment not performed
EN EN
111
14. Instructions to fill in template RT.99.02 — Financial entities in the scope of sub-consolidation or consolidation
Column Code Column Name Type Fill-in Instruction Fill-in Option
RT.99.02.010 LEI of the entity in Alphanumerical Identify the financial entities in the scope of sub-consolidation or Mandatory
the scope of sub- consolidation covered in this Register of information using the Legal
consolidation or Entity Identifier (LEI) 20-character, alpha-numeric code based on the
consolidation covered ISO 17442 standard valid and active at the date of last update.
in this Register of
information
RT.99.02.020 Date of integration in Date Identify the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code of the date of integration in Mandatory
the Register of the Register of information
information
RT.99.02.030 Date of deletion in the Date Identify the ISO 8601 (yyyy–mm–dd) code of the date of deletion in the Mandatory
Register of Register of information.
information If the financial entity has not been deleted, ‘9999-12-31’ shall be
reported
EN EN
112
Annex III
List of activities by type of entity
Type of entity List of activities and services
(a) credit institutions Activities listed in Annex I of Directive
2013/36/EU (CRD)
Activities listed in Section A and B of Annex
I of Directive 2014/65/EU (MiFID)
(b) payment institutions, including payment Activities listed in Annex I of Directive
institutions exempted pursuant to Directive 2015/2366/EU (PSD2)
(EU) 2015/2366
(c) account information service providers Provision of account information services in
accordance with Directive 2015/2366/EU
(PSD2)
(d) electronic money institutions, including Issuing electronic money in accordance with
electronic money institutions exempted 2009/110/EC (EMD) and further activities
pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC listed in Article 6 of that Directive
(e) investment firms Investment services and activities listed in
Annex I of Directive 2014/65/EU (MiFID,
sections A and B)
(f) crypto-asset service providers as Services and activities listed in Article 3(9) of
authorised under a Regulation of the MiCAR
European Parliament and of the Council on
markets in crypto-assets, and amending
Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No
1095/2010 and Directives 2013/36/EU and
(EU) 2019/1937 (‘the Regulation on markets
in crypto-assets’) and issuers of asset-
referenced tokens
(g) central securities depositories Activities listed in Annex of Regulation (EU)
No 909/2014 (CSDR)
0
Type of entity List of activities and services
(h) central counterparties Activity of CCPs as described in Article 2(1)
of Regulation EU No 648/2012 (EMIR)
(i) trading venues Activity of trading venues as described in
Article 2(4) of Regulation EU No 648/2012
(EMIR)
(j) trade repositories Activities of trade repositories a described in
Article 2(2) of Regulation EU No 648/2012
(EMIR) and in Article 3(1) of Regulation No
2015/2365 on transparency of securities
financing transactions and of reuse and
amending EMIR (SFTR)
(k) managers of alternative investment funds Activities listed in Article 6(4) + Annex I of
Directive 2011/61/EU (AIFMD)
(l) management companies Activities listed in Article 6(3) + Annex II of
Directive 2009/65/EC (UCITs)
(m) data reporting service providers Services listed in Annex I of Directive
2014/65/EU (MiFID, sections D)
(n) insurance and reinsurance undertakings Activities authorised for the classes of non-
life insurance as described in Annex I Section
B of Directive 2009/138/ECand classes of life
insurance as described in Annex II of
Directive 2009/138/EC (Solvency II)
(o) insurance intermediaries, reinsurance Activities of insurance distribution and
intermediaries and ancillary insurance reinsurance distribution as described in
intermediaries Articles 2(1)(1) and 2(1)(2) of Directive (EU)
2016/97 (IDD)
(p) institutions for occupational retirement Activities of IORPs as described in article 7
provision of Directive 2016/2341 (IORP II)
(q) credit rating agencies Activities of CRAs as described in Article
3.1(b) of Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009
1
Type of entity List of activities and services
(r) administrators of critical benchmarks Activity of administrators of critical
benchmarks as described in Article 3.1(6) of
Regulation (EU) 2016/1011
(s) crowdfunding service providers Provision of crowdfunding services in
accordance with Article 3 of Regulation (EU)
2020/1503
(t) securitisation repositories Activity of SRs as described in Article 2(23)
of Regulation (EU) 2017/2402
Non-financial entity: ICT intra-group service Not applicable
provider
Non-financial entity: Other intra-group entity Not applicable
Non-financial entity: ICT third-party service Not applicable
provider
2
Annex IV
List of ICT services
ICT ICT service name Description
service
Identfier
S1 1.Software licencing Rental of software run on premises.
(excluding SaaS)
S2 2. ICT project management Covering provision of services related to: Business
analysis, Development, Project Management
Officer (PMO).
S3 3. ICT Development Covering provision of services related to: ICT
development, Software development, testing.
S4 4. ICT help desk and ICT Covering provision of services related to: ICT
incident management support, incident management.
S5 5. ICT security Covering provision of services related to: ICT
management services security (protection, detection, response and
recovering), including security incident handling
and forensics.
S6 6. Provision of data Subscription to the services of data providers.
(digital data service)
S7 7. Data analysis Covering provision of services related to the
support for data analysis. (digital data service)
S8 8. ICT facilities Rental of facilities and physical infrastructures.
This includes the provision of fluids, telecom
access and physical onsite security.
S9 9. Computation Rental of capabilities for digital processing
(including data computation). This is usually
performed in the context of a cloud environment.
S10 10. Non-Cloud Data Rental of data storage platform (excluding Cloud
storage services).
3
S11 11. Telecom carrier Operations for telecommunication systems and
flow management. Traditional analogue telephone
services are excluded as per Article 3(21) of
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554
S12 12. Network materials Rental of the equipment for the deployment of the
ICT network.
S13 13. Hardware rental Rental of workstations, phone, servers…
S14 14. ICT operation Covering provision of services related to:
management (excluding infrastructure (systems and hardware except
network services) network) configuration, installing, capacity
management, business continuity management.
S15 15. Network services Covering provision of services related to: network
configuration / setting, implementation,
management.
S16 16. ICT Consulting Any other provisions of intellectual / ICT expertise
services. Including Managed Service Providers
(MSP)
S17 17. ICT Risk management Implementation of the controls for the second and
and ICT audit third line of defence.
S18 18. Cloud services: IaaS Infrastructure-as-a-Service
S19 19. Cloud services: PaaS Platform-as-a-Service
S20 20. Cloud services: SaaS Software-as-a-Service
To be 21. Other ICT services Other ICT services not listed above
defined
in
Template
RT.07.01
4
Annex V
Instruction to report the “total value of assets” and the “value of other financial
indicator” per type of financial entity
Value of total assets
Type of entity Instruction to report value of total assets in
column RT.01.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0060 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
(a) credit institutions Information as specified in Annex 10,
Template C40.00 Row 0410, Column 0010 of
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU)
2021/451
(b) payment institutions, including payment Value of the total assets in the statutory
institutions exempted pursuant to Directive accounts
(EU) 2015/2366
(c) account information service providers Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(d) electronic money institutions, including Value of the total assets in the statutory
electronic money institutions exempted accounts
pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC
(e) investment firms Information as specified in Annex I, template
Z01.00, column 0090 of Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1624
(f) crypto-asset service providers as Value of the total assets in the statutory
authorised under a Regulation of the accounts
European Parliament and of the Council on
markets in crypto-assets, and amending
Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No
1095/2010 and Directives 2013/36/EU and
(EU) 2019/1937 (‘the Regulation on markets
5
Type of entity Instruction to report value of total assets in
column RT.01.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0060 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
in crypto-assets’) and issuers of asset-
referenced tokens
(g) central securities depositories Value of the total assets reported in the
audited financial statements reported to CAs
pursuant to article 41(a) Regulation (EU)
2017/392
(h) central counterparties Information as reported in "Public
quantitative disclosure standards for central
counterparties", field 15.2
(i) trading venues No specific format nor financial information
required to be provided.
(j) trade repositories Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(k) managers of alternative investment funds Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(l) management companies Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(m) data reporting service providers Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(n) insurance and reinsurance undertakings Information as specified in Annex II and
Annex II, Template S02.01 Row 0500,
Column 0010 of Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2015/2450
(o) insurance intermediaries, reinsurance Value of the total assets in the statutory
intermediaries and ancillary insurance accounts
intermediaries
6
Type of entity Instruction to report value of total assets in
column RT.01.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0060 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
(p) institutions for occupational retirement Information as specified in ECB guideline
provision 2021/831 Annex 1 Part 4 Section 2
(q) credit rating agencies Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(r) administrators of critical benchmarks Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(s) crowdfunding service providers Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
(t) securitisation repositories Value of the total assets in the statutory
accounts
Non-financial entity: ICT intra-group service Not applicable
provider
Non-financial entity: Other intra-group entity Not applicable
Non-financial entity: ICT third-party service Not applicable
provider
7
Value of other financial indicator
Type of entity Instruction to report value of other
financial indicator in column
RT.01.01.0080 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
(a) credit institutions Not applicable
(b) payment institutions, including payment Total amount of payment transactions
institutions exempted pursuant to Directive executed by the payment institution in the
(EU) 2015/2366 preceding year, as provided in Article 9 (1) of
Directive (EU) 2015/2366
(c) account information service providers not applicable
(d) electronic money institutions, including Total amount of payment transactions
electronic money institutions exempted executed by the payment institution in the
pursuant to Directive 2009/110/EC preceding year, as provided in Article 9 (1) of
Directive (EU) 2015/2366
and
Average outstanding electronic money issued
by electronic money institution as set out in
Article 5(3) of Directive 2009/110/EC.
(e) investment firms Depending on the activities of the investment
firm: assets under management, client money
held, assets safeguarded and administered,
client orders handled or daily trading flow as
provided in Title II, Chapter 1 of Regulation
(EU) 2019/2033
(f) crypto-asset service providers as Not applicable
authorised under a Regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on
8
Type of entity Instruction to report value of other
financial indicator in column
RT.01.01.0080 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
markets in crypto-assets, and amending
Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No
1095/2010 and Directives 2013/36/EU and
(EU) 2019/1937 (‘the Regulation on markets
in crypto-assets’) and issuers of asset-
referenced tokens
(g) central securities depositories "substantial importance in more than one
member State" (CSDR Art 24(4), Regulation
(EU) 2017/389, ESMA Guidelines ESMA70-
708036281-67) calculated annually by ESMA
and based on:
- the annual values of settlement instructions
settled by each CSD,
- the market value of financial instruments
issued by issuers from host Member States
- the market value of financial instruments
centrally maintained in securities accounts by
the CSD for participants and other holders of
securities accounts from host Member State
(h) central counterparties Average daily volume (Public quantitative
disclosure standards for central counterparties
23.1) or Gross notional outstanding (Public
quantitative disclosure standards for central
counterparties 23.2)
(i) trading venues
9
Type of entity Instruction to report value of other
financial indicator in column
RT.01.01.0080 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
The Average Daily Turnover as required
under REGULATION (EU) 2017/577 of 13
June 2016.
(j) trade repositories Number of trades reported to the trade
repository during the previous year (n-1) and
the number of recorded outstanding trades on
31 December of the previous year (n-1)
(k) managers of alternative investment funds Assets under Management (as reported in IT
technical guidance 2013/1358)
(l) management companies Assets under Management
(m) data reporting service providers Number of transactions reported under article
26 of MiFIR (ARMs) and the number of the
transactions published by APAs
(n) insurance and reinsurance undertakings Value of the net written premiums
underwritten by the undertaking in
application of Directive 91/674/EEC, where
applicable. The net premiums written
represent the sum of
the direct business and the accepted
reinsurance business reduced by the
amount ceded to reinsurance undertakings.
(o) insurance intermediaries, reinsurance Value of the turnover of the intermediary as
intermediaries and ancillary insurance reported in the statutory accounts of the
intermediaries undertaking and defined in compliance to
Article 19 of Directive (EU) 2016/97.
10
Type of entity Instruction to report value of other
financial indicator in column
RT.01.01.0080 in case of register of
information maintained at entity level and
RT.04.01.0070 in case of register of
information maintained at sub-
consolidated or consolidated level
(p) institutions for occupational retirement Value of total net contributions receivable,
provision calculated as the total value of contributions
receivable (code 48 00 1 and code 48 00 2
according to Annex I of Regulation 250/2009)
less reinsurance contributions ceded (code 48
05 0 according to Annex I of Regulation
250/2009).
(q) credit rating agencies Assessment by ESMA
(r) administrators of critical benchmarks The number of critical benchmarks is pretty
limited. Those with a EU footprint can be
identified based on the annex of CIR (EU)
2016/1368.
(s) crowdfunding service providers Amount raised, consistently with table 2 of
the Annex of CIR (EU) 2022/2120 of 13 July
2022
(t) securitisation repositories Total number of transactions, based on article
2.2 of CDR (EU) 2020/1229
of 29 November 2019
Non-financial entity: ICT intra-group service Not applicable
provider
Non-financial entity: Other intra-group entity Not applicable
Non-financial entity: ICT third-party service Not applicable
provider
11
6. Draft cost- benefit analysis / impact
assessment
6.1 Draft cost-benefit analysis / impact assessment
1. As per Article 15(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 (EBA Regulation), of Regulation (EU) No
1094/2010 (EIOPA Regulation) and Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 (ESMA regulation), any draft
implementing technical standards developed by the ESAs shall be accompanied by an Impact
Assessment (IA) which analyses ‘the potential related costs and benefits’.
2. The next paragraphs present the IA of the main policy options included in this Consultation Paper
(CP) on implementing technical standards (ITS) to establish the standard templates for the purposes
of the register of information as mandated by Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
A. Problem identification
3. According to Article 28(3) of the Regulation 2022/2554 (DORA), financial entities (FEs) shall
maintain and update at entity level, and at sub-consolidated and consolidated levels, a register of
information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT
third-party service providers. Those contractual arrangements shall be appropriately documented,
distinguishing between those that cover ICT services supporting critical or important functions and
those that do not. Article 28(9) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 mandates the ESAs to develop draft
implementing technical standards to establish the standard templates for the purposes of the
register of information.
B. Policy objectives
4. The register of information (i) will be used by FEs as part of their ICT and third-party risk
management framework, (ii) will enable the effective supervision of the financial entities’ ICT and
12
third-party risk management framework by competent authorities (CAs), and (iii) will support, as
key source of information, the designation process of critical third-party providers subject to the
DORA oversight framework.
5. The templates of the register of information included in the draft ITS should be designed to enable
the fulfilment of the three objectives of the register of information itself as described in paragraph
4 above. In relation to the first objective of the register of information (i.e. FE internal management
of ICT and third-party risk), the templates should be designed ensuring a minimum level of content
harmonisation, giving however the possibility to FEs to tailor them to their internal and individual
risk management purposes. Finally, the templates and the requirements of their data points should
be designed considering a data management and reporting perspective to ensure consistency and
harmonisation by design and avoid burdensome reprocessing of data for reporting purposes.
C. Baseline scenario
6. The baseline scenario differs from the different type of FEs in scope of DORA as certain are subject
already to outsourcing requirements stemming from their respective financial regulations (e.g.
credit institutions or insurance and reinsurance undertakings), while others (e.g. insurance and
reinsurance intermediaries) do not have specific outsourcing requirements in their financial
regulations. Moreover, in relation to these requirements, it is important to highlight the different
level of granularity and implementation by the different CAs in their supervisory practices.
7. For some of the FEs subject to outsourcing requirements, guidelines at national and European level
(e.g. EBA guidelines on outsourcing7, EIOPA8 and ESMA9 guidelines on outsourcing to cloud service
providers) contain the requirements for financial entities to maintain and update the structured
recording of certain information, also in the form of a register, in relation to their outsourcing
arrangements, including but not limited to those relating to ICT outsourcing. In the past years,
national and European CAs have carried out data collection for supervisory purposes of these
registers. It is however to be noted that the perimeter of ICT outsourcing and DORA ICT services
7 https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/internal-governance/guidelines-on-outsourcing-arrangements
8 https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/publications/guidelines-outsourcing-cloud-service-providers_en
9 https://www.esma.europa.eu/document/guidelines-outsourcing-cloud-service-providers
13
does not match completely, with the latter (DORA perimeter) encompassing the first but extending
also to services typically not included in the perimeter of ICT outsourcing (e.g. the purchase of
licences for software)
8. Furthermore, as part of the preparatory activities for DORA, in July 2022 the ESAs have performed
a first data collection exercise of the ICT landscape of a subset of financial entities in scope of DORA
considering the definitions included in the commission proposal of DORA regulation.
D. Options considered
In the process of developing the ITS a holistic approach was necessary to develop the templates of the
register of information. The key drivers taken into account while evaluating the options outlined below
are listed below:
(i) the requirements of DORA, particularly the one requiring financial entities to include in
the register of information all contractual arrangements concerning ICT services;
(ii) the principle of proportionality,
(iii) the need to define templates valid both at entity and sub-consolidated and consolidated
level, considering the broad population of financial entities in scope of DORA, the
requirements of the accounting directive and of the prudential regulations, where
applicable;
(iv) the need to be able to aggregate information contained in the register of information at
group (by the financial entities part of a group), national (by the CAs) and European (by
the ESAs) level.
14
POLICY ISSUE 1: SCOPE IN TERMS OF CONTRACTS OF THE REGISTER OF INFORMATION
Options considered
Option A: include all contractual arrangements concerning all ICT services provided to FEs by ICT third
party service providers
Option B: include contractual arrangements concerning only ICT services provided to FEs by ICT third
party service providers supporting critical or important functions.
Cost-benefit analysis
Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 specifies that the scope of the register of information shall
cover all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service
provider. Therefore, the option of considering as part of the scope only ICT third party service providers
providing ICT services supporting critical or important functions would not comply with the level 1 text.
Preferred option
Option A has been retained.
POLICY ISSUE 2: STRUCTURE OF THE REGISTER OF INFORMATION
Options considered
Option A: develop a set of minimum level of harmonised templates to cover the three purposes of the
register of information as described in paragraph 4 of the policy objectives, encouraging financial
entities to complement the register of information for ICT risk management purpose.
15
Option B: develop a set of prescriptive detailed templates to cover the three purposes of the register
of information as described in paragraph 4 of the policy objectives.
Cost-benefit analysis
The register of information shall serve three different purposes, as described in paragraph 4 of the
policy objectives, for a large number of FEs and CAs. In assessing the viability of this option, the ESAs
have considered: (i) the different maturity of FEs in relation to their internal third-party risk
management, (ii) the different business models and risk profile of the FEs in scope of DORA; and (iii)
the principle of proportionality. Furthermore, in assessing this policy option the ESAs have considered
that (i) the scope of the register of information (i.e. the contractual arrangements concerning ICT
services) covers a high number of elements evolving over time and (ii) the FEs retain the ultimate
responsibility in relation to the compliance with their obligations set out in DORA and other relevant
applicable financial regulations. Finally, the ESAs have considered the need to define an harmonised
set of templates to foster effective supervisory convergence in the area of third-party risk management
supervision and to enable a